--- Page 1 ---

A Feasible IoT-Based System for Precision Agriculture 
 
Radovan Stojanović 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering 
University of Montenegro and 
MECOnet 
Podgorica, Montenegro 
stox@ac.me 
Vesna Maraš 
Development sector 
13. jul Plantaže, 
Podgorica, Montenegro 
vesna.maras@plantaze.com 
Sanja Radonjić 
Development sector 
13. jul Plantaže, 
Podgorica, Montenegro 
sanja.radonjic@plantaze.com 
Anita Martić 
Development sector 
13. jul Plantaže, 
Podgorica, Montenegro 
anita.martic@plantaze.com 
 
Jovan Đurković 
MANT and MECOnet 
Podgorica, Montenegro 
dj.jovan94@gmail.com 
Katarina Pavićević 
Development sector 
13. jul Plantaže, 
Podgorica, Montenegro 
katarina.pavicevic@plantaze.com 
Vasilije Mirović 
Development sector 
13. jul Plantaže, 
Podgorica, Montenegro 
vasilije.mirovic@plantaze.com 
Miljan Cvetković 
Faculty of Agriculture 
University of Banja Luka 
Banja Luka, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina 
miljan.cvetkovic@agro.unibl.org 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a feasible and a low-cost IoT based 
monitoring system for precision agriculture , with emphasis to 
viticulture. A field/crop data a re acqu ired by self -powered 
measuring station and sent to remote collector, located in the home 
or office. The collector accepts the data and forward them via 
home/office WiFi to commercial or open IoT servers (as 
ThingSpeak) for further visualization, analyze and react back . 
Using available APIs, any web application on any server can 
communicate with IoT server, and thus with field station. Every 
authorized person or farmer , who has computer or gadget with 
Internet access can monitor parameters of interest and control 
back associated processes as irrigation or ventilation. Principle of 
operation, h ardware and software architecture as well as 
preliminary results are shortly elaborated. 
Keywords-IoT; LoRa; agriculture; telemonitoring; remote 
control; node MCU; precision 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Global w orld growing population faces many challenges, 
among others, in food production. T here are obvious efforts to 
employ Industry 4.0 technologies in agriculture, in order to 
achieve increased production in term of quantity and quality, 
efficient ecological management, financial savings, water 
supply management and other benefits. 
Specific data for precision agriculture (PA) are provided by 
range of specific sensors connected to hardware devices with 
adequate software applications [2]. Such systems are capable to 
measure, visualize, monitor and analyze soil and environmental 
parameters [3] and provide adequate feedbacks from the user 
[1,2,5,6]. There are a large number of such systems on the 
market, with different characteristics and prices. The set of 
parameters to be measured varies from temperature, humidity 
to sunlight as well as to content of chlorophyll in the leaf. 
Sometimes, the chemical elements in the soil are included. 
Also, their working principle varies from stand -alone 
components with manually readings to those that have their 
own network and are powered by custom designed applications 
on dedicated servers. 
However, the d esigning PA system for purpose of 
viticulture presents research and engineering challenge [1]. The 
wine yards are of large areas, often away from home or office 
and it is not easy to be covered by reliable communication 
network. WiFi that is the most used networking protocol in PA 
is suitable for small plots or indoor farming. Usually requires 
the presence of electricity or more powerful solar sources on the 
plantation, because the consumption of the router network is not 
small. 
Taking into account the specifics of viticulture and wine 
yards concerning PA, this paper proposes an adequate system, 
which can meet the requirements. Being inexpensive, based on 
available and open-source technologies, scalable and dynamic, 
such system is a feasible solution for developing countries, 
where the farmers have not possibility to deal with expensive 
commercial solutions . It offers several functional advantages 
as: (i) powering autonomy, (ii) long-range communication, (iii) 
integration with existing commercial or free IoT platforms like 
ThingSpeak, (iv) easy embedding in individual or company 
web sites/servers and (v) accessibility with any person or farmer 
equipped by internet access. The same system and approach can 
be employed in similar PA applications related to other crops. 
Here we describe some elements of proposed PA solution : 
operating principle, hardware -software architecture and 
preliminary testing results. 
II. PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION 
A. Hardware considerations 
The operation principle follows system architecture given in 
Figure 1. Autonomy SMART-MES STATION integrates: solar 
panel, p ower supply electro nics with internal battery, ESP32 
based N ode MCU (from Heltec) with integrated Lo-Ra 
communication module, sensors actuators (amplifiers or 
interfaces) and power switches in forms of relays or 
semiconductor outputs [7]. Currently, the system is capable to 
measure three parameters: air temperature, humidity, and soil 
moisture, but it can be easily extended to others. Low cost and 

--- Page 2 ---

widely available DHT11 sensor is used for air temperature and 
humidity, while for soil moisture measurement t he special 
sensor solution has been developed. After collecting data from 
the sensors, the station send s them by LoRa communication 
protocol to collector, which can be about 5 km away [8]. LoRa 
technology uses the chirp modulation and two layers of 
cryptography. It can grow into a complex network of any size 
(LoRaWAN), transferring the data between the adjacent nodes. 
The LoRa module MCU has external 19dB antenna, operating 
at 868MHz (Europe) , while other frequencies are supported 
worldwide. It has satisfac tory power consumption. With its 
characteristics LoRa protocol represents a very competitive 
solution for purpose of PA. 
 
Figure 1: The general working principle of a proposed system 
REMOTE COLLECTOR is a hybrid transmitter operated by 
the identical MCU ESP32 based node from Heltec, with 
integrated LoRaWAN module. Digital filters and software 
routines are used to ensure correct encryption of the receiving 
messages, under presence of different noise. In order to achieve 
the maximal range between two LoRaWAN nodes, the message 
should be as short as possible. It is because the error probability 
increases with the message length, and only one misinterpreted 
byte is enough to receive unusabl e content. Experiments have 
shown that larger communication range was achieved when 
sending only a few bytes compared to long descriptive strings. 
Additionally, in some extreme cases when it is crucial to reach 
the very top distance without using additiona l hardware, it can 
be done by splitting a message into one-byte sized chunks, and 
then sending them multiple times to gain satisfactory 
probability. Both, node MCUs in the station and collector have 
built-in OLED display to watch on -line data or to perform 
adequate setting and user interfacing. 
In addition of performing LoRa communication the 
collector has possibility to simultaneously communicated with 
nearby WiFi spot as it is home/office WiFi router. All 
communications of node MCU are duplex. 
The innovative sensor device, developed during this internal 
experiment is a soil moisture sensor, based on capacitive 
principle, Figure 2 . Namely, our experimentation proved that 
exiting low-cost soil moisture sensors , such as Capacitive soil 
moisture sensor v1.2 are not enough precise and, practically, 
unusable. The proposed soil measurement sensor is based on 
capacitive to PWM converter, Figure 2. It converts difference 
of two capacitors, abs(Cx-Cref) into a duty cycle D of PWM 
signal, and thus in average value of filtered PWM signal. 
 
D=T2/(T1+T2) = f(abs(Cx-Cr)), VF=D*5V+(1-D)*0V (1) 
 
The oscillator with core frequency f is driving two parallel 
branches RCref and RCx, where Cx is the capacitance between 
the sensor electrodes, while Cref is the reference capacitance. 
In absence of the soil Cx and Cref are almost equal, Cx = Cref, 
and DELAY (RCx) -DELAY (RCref) is practically equal to 0 , 
that cause minimal duty cycle and minimal average voltage. 
Figure 3, shows diagram s in characteristics points of proposed 
capacitive sensor. Amplifier amplify signal VF in a range that 
is readable in satisfactory resolution by microprocessor’s A/D , 
usually in range 0-5V. 
 
OSCILATOR
R
R
Cx
Cref
AMPLIFIER
A
B
C
D
B
GND
GND
plates
insulator
soil
B’
C’
R
Low-pass filter
E F
 
Figure 2: Principal scheme of capacitive sensor 
 
Figure 3: Diagrams in characteristic points of capacitive sensor 

--- Page 3 ---

B. Software considerations 
The software consists of firmware and cloud-based software 
applications. Firmware is responsible for NodeMCU general 
operation, sensors handling, LoRa communication, 
communication with ThingSpeak server and other on -board 
related tasks. The main component of cloud -based software is 
ThingSpeak application, where we setup our profile, API keys, 
diagram channels and other applications like TalkBack, used 
for handling and visualize our signals [9]. Both, nodeMCU and 
user can communicate with ThingSpeak. Node MCU sends data 
for channels (diagrams) updating and simultaneously get s the 
last command stored in commands queue. It is done b y HTTP 
GET or POST protocols, implemented on a Node MCU. There 
are two ways to send commands to MCU via ThingSpeak. User 
can do it through any web browser or web application by HTTP 
POST and GET protocols. The same command can be set 
within ThingSpeak HTTP interface. 
 
 
Figure 4: Software flow for sending data for diagrams and get commands 
III. TESTING PROCEDURE AND OBTAINED RESULTS 
The proposed system was thoroughly tested over a period of 
five months and found to be precise and reliable. The length of 
a sending data string affected the probability of successful 
communication when reaching the far distance limit. So, it had 
to be shortened for the better results. The string was binary 
compressed to the length of 4 characters and reached distance 
of 1.5 km, which was more than enough for our testing 
conditions. 
In term of power consumption, the following results are 
achieved: the device draws about 60 mA when all the circuits 
are powered simultaneously , adding short peaks of another 60 
mA while LoRa was active. 
Figures 5 show the physical look of a system and the 
collector serial communication output. Figure 6, shows 
visualization of the data sent to ThingSpeak for 3 channels, as 
well as visualization of active command value. Figure 7. shows 
interface for sending commands implemented in JavaScript 
code that can be very easily embedded in any web environment. 
 
Figure 5: Station in wine yard and in micro farming environment. The 
collector is a small device-box located far away from station in place where 
Wi Fi is accessible. 
 
 
 

--- Page 4 ---

 
 
Figure 6: Charts showing: air humidity (1), air temperature (2), soil moisture 
(3), and control (4) 
Two-way communication over the internet is of crucial 
significance to be able to have the fully functional IoT 
application, meaning that we can control our system remotely 
from any place in the world [6]. The Figure 7 shows an example 
of sending the control data from server to the MCU. 
 
Figure 7: Sending control commands 
IV. CONCLUSION 
Precision agriculture is a modern approach in agro 
production that allows implementation of new ICT based 
technologies with aim to increase production under better 
quality as well as to visualize, analyze and control many of the 
processes related to this area [2,4,5]. As example, w ater 
management is the most important [5]. In this paper, we present 
a system that is able to perform ICT based precision agriculture 
tasks. It uses low-cost components and open code platforms and 
as such is very suitable for developing countries, where the 
farmers could not purc hase and install expensive commercial 
solutions. The main components of the proposed systems are 
station, collector and cloud software. The station consists of low 
costs sensors, node ESP32 based MCU with LoRa 
communication module , solar powering unit and energy 
devices switching unit. Collector accepts data sent by LoRa and 
forward them to the cloud. Its main component is identical 
Node ESP32 based MCU. The main cloud component is IoT 
server ThingSpeak, modular and suitable platform with many 
upgrading possibilities. The user can communicate with station 
in order to follow and control processes, directly via 
ThingSpeak or indirectly via its simple web browser 
application. The overall price of the system is less than 200 
EUR. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This paper is supported with following projects: 
SMART4ALL ( Self-sustained customized cyberphysical 
system experiments for capacity building among European 
stakeholders) and VIRAL (Vitalising ICT Relevance in 
Agricultural Learning). Authors are greatly thankful. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Elijah, O.; Rahman, T.A.; Orikumhi, I.; Leow, C.Y.; Hindia, M.N. An 
Overview of Internet of Things (IoT) and Data Analytics in Agriculture: 
Benefits and Challenges. IEEE Internet Things J. 2018, 5, 3758–3773 
[2] Ivanov S., Bhargava K., Donnelly W. Precisio n farming: Sensor 
analytics. IEEE Intell. Syst. 2015;30:76–80. doi: 
10.1109/MIS.2015.67. [CrossRef] [Google Scholar] 
[3] Maraš, V., Popović, T., Gajinov, S., Mugoša, M., Popović, V. Savović, 
A., P avićević, K., Mirović, V. (2020): Precision Viticulture Using 
Wireless Sensor Network. In 2020 9th Mediterranean Conference on 
Embedded Computing (MECO) Budva, Montenegro. DOI: 
10.1109/MECO49872.2020.9134174 
[4] Maraš, V., Popović, T., Gajinov, S., Mugoša, M., Popović, V. Savović, 
A., Pavićević, K., Mirović, V (2019): Optimal irrigation as a tool of 
precision agriculture. In 2019 8th Mediterranean Conference on 
Embedded Computing (MECO) Budva, Montenegro, pp. 533-536. DOI: 
10.1109/MECO.2019.8760145 
[5] Daniel Francis Selvaraj, J., Jeba Jingle, D., Mano Paul, P. (2019): 
Automatic Wireless Water Management System(AWWMS) for Smart 
Vineyard Irrigation using IoT Technology. International Journal of 
Oceans and Oceanography. 13. 211-218. 
[6] John Gialelis, Maria Fokaeos, Gerasimos Theodorou, Christos Paparizos, 
Nikos Tsafas, A Low Cost Energy Efficient IoT Node Utilized in the 
Agricultural Field, 2020 9th Mediterranean Conference on Embedded 
Computing (MECO), 1-6. 
[7] Heltec, https://heltec.org/project/wifi-lora-32/, Accessed 25.3.2021. 
[8] LoRa Alliance, https://lora-alliance.org/, Accessed 25.3.2021. 
[9] Thing Speak, https://thingspeak.com/, Accessed 25.3.2021.