--- Page 1 ---

Chatbot Application to Support Smart Agriculture 
in Thailand 
Paweena Suebsombut 
College of Arts, Media and Techology 
and Institut Universitaire de 
Technologie Lumière , 
Chiang Mai University and Université 
Lumière Lyon 2 , 
Chiang Mai ( Thailand ), Bron (France) 
paweena_sueb@cmu.ac.th 
Suepphong Chernbumroong 
College of Arts, Media and Techology, 
Chiang Mai University 
Chiang Mai, Thailand 
suepphong@kic.camt.info 
Pradorn Sureephong 
College of Arts, Media and Techology, 
Chiang Mai University, 
Chiang Mai, Thailand 
dorn@camt.info 
Abdelaziz Bouras 
College of Engineering, 
Qatar University, 
Doha, Qatar 
abdelaziz.bouras@qu.edu.qa
Aicha Sekhari 
Instit ut Universitaire de Technologie 
Lumière, 
Université Lumière Lyon 2, 
Bron, France 
aicha.sekhari@univ -lyon2.fr 
Abstract— A chatbot is a software d eveloped to help reply to 
text or voice co nversat ions automatica lly and quic kly in real 
tim e. In t he agr iculture s ector, t he exist ing smart agr iculture 
syst ems just use data from sensi ng and internet of th ings (IoT) 
technologies that exclud e crop cultivation knowledge to sup port 
decis ion-making by farm ers. To enha nce this, the c hat bot 
applicat ion ca n be a n ass istant to farm ers to provide crop 
cult ivation know ledge. Consequently, we propos e the LINE 
chatbot app licat ion as an informa tion a nd knowle dge 
repres entation prov iding crop c ultivat ion recommendations to 
farm ers. It wor ks with smart agriculture and r ecommendation 
syst ems. Our proposed LINE chatbot app lication co nsists of five 
main functions (start/stop m enu, main pag e, drip irri gation 
page, mist irrigatio n pag e, a nd mo nitor pag e). Farm ers will 
receiv e information for data monitori ng to s upport their 
decis ion-making. Mor eover, t hey can contro l t he irr igation 
syst em via t he LIN E c hatbot. F urthermore, farm ers ca n ask 
quest ions relevant to the crop environment v ia a chat box. After 
imp lementi ng our proposed c hatbot, farmers are v ery satisfied 
with the app lication, scoring a 96% satisfaction score. Ho wever, 
in t erms of as king q uestions v ia c hat box, t his LIN E c hat bot 
applicat ion is a rule-based bot or scr ipt bot. Farm ers have to 
type in t he correct keywords as prescribed, otherwise they won't 
get a respo nse from the chatbots. In the f uture, we will enhance 
the as king function of our LINE chatbot to b e an intelligent bot. 
Keywords— Chatbot Application, Crop Cultivation, Smart 
Agriculture, Knowledge and Information Representation 
I. INTRODUCTION
"Smart Agriculture" is the concept of precision agriculture 
by using information and communication technology (ICT) to 
measure and control a crop and it s environ ment, such as 
temperature, soil, etc., for optimum productivity. The main 
aim of smart agriculture is to use smart technologies to help 
farmers increase their income and agricultural sustainability, 
including re source wisely u sing smart technologies [ 1]. 
Therefore, adoption of smart internet of things (Io T) 
technologies in the agricultural do main helps farmers with 
production cost reduction and yield improvement. The major 
aim of IoT technology is to make it readable, recognizable, 
locatable, and addressable by using Wireless Sensor 
Networks 
(WSN), Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), or other 
means. 
The IoT concept is adopted in various domains of the 
agriculture sector. For example, in the study [2], they literate 
the IoT application in precision agriculture. They proposed a 
monitoring system using wireless sensor networks and the 
internet. To provide data for agricultural research, they 
developed an information management system [2]. 
Meanwhile, "digital agriculture" based on IoT was proposed 
by Chen and Jin. The different sensor types are used to coll ect 
crop and field environment information, such as wind, soi l 
water content, temperature, etc., and the information i s 
analyzed by the system [3]. Furthermore, Wi-Fi based WSN 
in IoT applications is explained by Li Li et al., which i s 
relevant to the IoT applications based on WSN, smart gri d, 
and Wi-Fi [4]. The smart grid helps to improve the reliabil i ty 
of data collection, provide information accuracy, and provi de 
an intelligent application of data collection. The intelligent 
application to monitor the environment based on IoT 
technology provides environmental information, such as ai r 
data, soil data, and water data, collected by using sensors and 
transferring the data to a cloud database or server for data 
processing and analyzing. 
To summarize, the application of IoT technology provi des 
numerous benefits to smart agriculture domains, affecti ng cost 
management and farm productivity. As mentioned earlier, 
several farming technologies have been implemented. 
However, the study [5] found that most of the local farmers i n 
Chiang Mai, Thailand is aged and lack IT literacy, whi ch 
makes it difficult to adopt new technologies. Thus, we propose 
that the chatbot could be the potential technology that woul d 
facilitate the user in the smart farming domain. Consequentl y, 
the aim of this paper is to propose a chatbot applicati on to 
support farmers' decision -making for crop cultivati on 
processes. 
II. LITERATURE AND RELATED WORKS
The Chatbot is an easy -to-use and very user -friendl y 
application, especially for the elderly group [6]. Furtherm ore, 
the elderly are eager to communicate with this virtual agent 
because it has the ability to console the lonely elderly. Chatbot 
is one form of information system that is used to match an 

--- Page 2 ---

information source to a predefined or desired acknowledge-
ment [7]. The chatbot application is an adoption of a com puter 
program that is artificially intelligent (AI). It imitates the 
communication behaviors of humans, including spoken or 
text, using intelligent techniques such as video processi ng, 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) or image processing [8]. 
The Chatbot provides streamlined information, avoi ds 
repetitive tasks, helps to save time, answers difficul t 
questions, and provides out -of-context information so that 
users can simplify their tasks. Thus, chatbot applicati ons are 
developed to handle huge numbers of users in a cost-effecti ve 
manner because they help to conquer the fallacious deci si ons 
and irrationalities that are caused by the behavior of humans. 
"Conversational agents" is also another name for chatbots 
that have artificial intelligence backing, NLP, and machi ne 
learning (ML). The speech of a human being will be processed 
either in the form of voice or text to simulate an interacti on or 
conversation with a real human. Users can use the chatbot vi a 
either standalone applications or web -based applicati ons. 
Nowadays, chatbot applications are commonly used in several 
domains, which are mostly used in the customer servi ce 
sector. The ability of a chatbot is to transfer data by searchi ng 
for appropriate keywords for information collection i n an easy 
way. A c hatbot is a specific domain of conversati onal 
interface using a social network, chat solution, or messagi ng 
platform for communication. One of the AI techniques bei ng 
used to design the chatbot is Pattern Matching [9]. With the 
design of an AI chatbot, we can create conversations and 
responses and actively learn by using NLP, which learns from 
conversations with customers. By using NLP techni ques, a 
computer is able to understand the languages spoken by 
humans. For example, the application of NLP for grammar or 
spell checking, such as Google, Grammarly, etc. The 
predictive search typing of Google assists in suggesti ng the 
next word. Therefore, the command to remember the previ ous 
searched words helps to improve the response time and 
efficiency of the chatbot application [10]. 
III. PROPOSED CHATBOT APPLICATION
There are several mobile chat applications used for 
communication. The survey result of [11] explains the hi ghest 
technology usage of farmers in Thailand for communicati on 
(see Fig.1.). 
Fig. 1. Survey result of Thai f armer’s technology usage 
(a) Technology device Usage 
(b) Reason of using technology device 
Fig. 1. illustrates the result of the technology usage of Thai 
farmers. According to the findings, Thai farmers primaril y use 
smartphones (65%) in their daily lives, as shown in Fig.1(a). 
In terms of communication platform, Thai farmers (17%) use 
the LINE chat mobile application to communicate with others, 
as shown in Fig.1(b). LINE is a freeware software applicati on 
that allows users to communicate instantly on electroni c 
devices. Such as cellphones, tablets, and desktop computers. 
LINE is the world's most popular mobile chat applicati on, 
connecting users, friends, and family closer. Consequentl y, i n 
this paper, we propose to use the LINE Chat mobil e 
application as the information and knowledge representati on 
for farmers to provide crop environment information, crop 
cultivation knowledge, and an appropriate recommendati on to 
farmers. 
Every day in the morning, our proposed LINE chatbot wil l 
send the knowledge video and current status to farmers . 
Moreover, during the day, it will send an appropri ate 
recommendation for crop cultivation (irrigation, fertilizati on, 
disease control, insect pest control, and weed control) if there 
is some abnormal situation that harms the crop. Moreover, the 
proposed LINE chatbot supports data monitoring and sm art 
irrigation control systems for farmers. Furthermore, farm ers 
can ask a particular crop environment question via LINE 
chatbot. For this asking function, we use DialogFlow to set the 
keywords for asking, also k nown as the rule -based bot or 
script bot. The DialogFlow has a feature that helps users fi nd 
the correct word when they type words. It will be used as the 
interface between Line chatbots and the system. However, we 
must interleave training sentences or words in order to trai n 
the DialogFlow. 
Fig. 2. LINE chatbot with DialogFlow and recommendation system 
 architecture 
Fig. 2 illustrates the architecture of our LINE chatbot wi th 
DialogFlow and a recommendation system. In terms of 
receiving recommendations, the recommendation system will 
automatically send the recommendation to the LINE chatbot 
when it finds some abnormal or harmful situation for the crop. 
In terms of data monitoring and control, the LINE chatbot wil l 
send the commands from farmers directly to the system . In 
terms of asking for some particular information, the LINE 
chatbot works with the DialogFlow to help farmers find the 
correct keywords, and then the DialogFlow will send the 
command to the system to get the requested information. 
Fig.3 depicts flow of our proposed LINE chatbot with fi ve 
primary functions: 
 Start/Stop menu: farmers need to click ‘Start’ to begi n
using the LINE chatbot. If farmers encounter any
problems, they can stop the LINE chatbot applicati on
by clicking on the ‘START/STOP Menu.'
 Main page: is the interface to show all relevant
information and recommendation to farmers both data 
monitoring and control system.
 Drip irrigation page: farmers can control ‘ON/OFF’ of
the drip irrigation based on the recommendation.
 Mist irrigation page: farmers can control ‘ON/OFF’ of
the mist irrigation system based on the
recommendation.
 Monitor page: farmers will receive relevant
information for crop cultivation for monitoring thei r

--- Page 3 ---

crop and field. Moreover, they can ask a particul ar 
question, such as "weather forecast," and the chatbot 
will respond with that information. 
Fig. 3. Flow of proposed LINE chatbot application 
IV. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Implementation Result
Our proposed LINE chatbot is implemented in Chi ang Mai
province (Thailand) for lettuce cultivation. Farmers added 
LINE friends by scanning the QR code. The LINE chatbot i s 
implemented with smart agriculture technologies (sensors and 
IoT technology) to repr esent the knowledge and 
recommendations for crop cultivation processes includi ng 
irrigation (drip and mist), fertilization, disease control, insect 
pest control, and weed control. 
The LINE chatbot application automatically transfer the 
status of field info rmation, knowledge, and an appropri ate 
recommendation to farmers (see Fig.4 – Fig.7). Followi ng 
receipt of the information and recommendations, the user m ay 
begin controlling the drip irrigation system to irrigate lettuce 
as directed. However, the user can always monitor their fiel d 
via the ‘MONITOR' page (see Fig.5). Furthermore, farm ers 
can ask a particular question to get some information by 
typing text on the main page as shown in Fig.8. 
After implementation, our proposed LINE chatbot 
application can support farmers for decision -making to 
cultivate crop. Farmers are very satisfied to our proposed 
LINE chatbot application with 96% of satisfaction score. 
Fig. 4. Main page and Start menu of LINE chatbot f or Lettuce cultivation 
Fig. 5. Monitor page of LINE chatbot f or Lettuce cultivation 
Fig. 6. Drip irrigation page of LINE chatbot f or Lettuce cultivation 
Fig. 7. Mist irrigation page of LINE chatbot f or Lettuce cultivation 
Fig. 8. Main page f or asking a particular question of LINE chatbot f or 
 Lettuce cultivation 
B. Discussion
In order to get the information from the proposed LINE 
chatbot application, farmers must type the correct keywords 
to get the information, which is the limitation of this LINE 
chatbot application. However, the flexible function i s 
required. This flexible function will help farmers get thei r 

--- Page 4 ---

requested information even if they type incorrect keywords. 
Therefore, our future work is the enhancement of the chat box 
function to help farmers receive their requested informati on 
even if they type incorrect keywords. 
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes the LINE chatbot mobile applicati on 
to support farmers with crop cultivation processes (irrigati on, 
fertilization, disease control, insect pest control, and weed 
control). The LINE chatbot will work with a recommendati on 
system and I oT technologies to represent informati on, 
knowledge, and recommendations to farmers. Farmers can 
also use the LINE chatbot to monitor their crops and fiel d 
environment, as well as control their irrigation systems (m i st 
and drip irrigation). The LINE chatbo t will receive the 
recommendation from the system automatically. Furtherm ore, 
farmers can ask for information via a chat box and DialogFl ow 
function. However, farmers must type in the correct keywords 
to get the requested information. This is the limitation of the 
proposed LINE chatbot application that we plan to enhance i n 
the future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the support of the 
Institute Universitaire de Technologie (I.U.T) Lumière, 
University Lumière Lyon 2 (France), College of Arts, Medi a, 
and Technology, Chiang Mai University (Thailand), and the 
College of Engineering, Qatar University (Qatar). We woul d 
also like to acknowledge all of our colleagues who worked 
together and provided encouragement to the authors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Muangprathub, N. Boonnam, S. Kajornkasirat, N. Lekbangpong, A .
Wanichsombat, and P. Nillaor, “ IoT and agriculture data analysis f or 
smart f arm,” Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 156, pp.
467-474, Jan. 2019.
[2] Zhao, Ji-chun, Jun-f eng Zhang, Yu Feng, and Jian-xin Guo. "The study 
and application of the IOT technology in agriculture." In Compute r 
Science and Inf ormation Technology ICCSIT, 2010 3rd IEEE 
International Conf erence on, vol. 2, pp. 462-465. IEEE, 2010.
[3] Chen, Xian-Yi, and Zhi -Gang Jin. "Research on key technology an d 
applications f or internet of things." Physics Procedia 33, pp. 561-566,
2011.
[4] Li, Li, Hu Xiaoguang, Chen Ke, and He Ketai. "The applications of 
WiFi -based wireless sensor network in internet of things and smart
grid." In Industrial Electronics and Applications ICIEA, 2011 6th IEEE 
Conf erence on, pp. 789-793. IEEE, 2011
[5] P. Suebsombut, S. Chernbumroong, P. Sureephong, P. Jaroenwanit, P.
Phuensane and A. Sekhari, "Comparison of Smart Agriculture Literacy 
of Farmers in Thailand," 2020 Joint International Conf erence on 
Digital Arts, Media and Technology with ECTI Northern Section
Conf erence on Electrical, Electronics, Computer and
Telecommunications Engineering (ECTI DAMT & NCON), 2020, pp.
242-245, doi: 10.1109/ECTIDAMTNCON48261.2020.90906
[6] W. Irene Yipei, Y. Y ing, C. Shu -Jung, T. Wei -Ju, and T. -J. Sung,
“ Acceptance and sustainability of health promotion solutions f or the 
elderly in Taiwan: Evidence f rom shi-lin elderly university in Taipei,” 
in ACM International Conf erence Proceeding Series, 2019, pp. 21–27. 
[7] J. Trivedi, “ Examining the Customer Experience of Using Banking
Chatbots and Its Impact on Brand Love: The Moderating Role of 
Perceived Risk,” J. Internet Commer., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 91–111, 2019. 
[8] K. Patil and M. S. Kulkarni, “ Artif icial intelligence in f i nancial
services: Customer chatbot advisor adoption,” Int. J. Innov. Technol.
Explor. Eng., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 4296–4303, 2019.
[9] M. Dahiya, “ A Tool of Conversation: Chatbot, International Journal of 
Computer Sciences and Engineering, Volume -5, Issue -5 E -ISSN :
2347-2693,” Int. J. Comput. Sci. Eng., vol. 5, no. December, 2017.
[10] V. Aggarwal, A. Jain, H. Khatter, and K. Gupta, “ Evolution of 
Chatbots f or Smart Assistance,” no. 10, pp. 77–83, 2019.
[11] Suebsombut P, Chernbumroong S, Sureephong P, Jaroenwanit P,
Phuensane P, Sekhari A. Comparison of Smart Agriculture Literacy of 
Farmers in Thailand. In2020 Joint International Conf erence on Digita l
Arts, Media and Technology with ECTI Northern Section Conf erence
on Electrical, Electronics, Computer and Telecommunications
Engineering (ECTI DAMT & NCON) 2020 Mar 11 (pp. 242 -245).
IEEE.