--- Page 1 ---

 International Journal of Engineering Applied Sciences and Technology, 2020 
 Vol. 4, Issue 12, ISSN No. 2455-2143, Pages 24-27 
 Published Online April 2020 in IJEAST (http://www.ijeast.com) 
 
24 
 
MACHINE LEARNING APPLICATIONS IN IOT 
BASED AGRICULTURE AND SMART 
FARMING: A REVIEW
 
 M.W.P Maduranga Ruvan Abeysekera 
 IIC University of Technology IIC University of Technology 
 No 650, NR2, Phnom Penh, Cambodia No 650, NR2, Phnom Penh, Cambodia 
 
Abstract— the Internet of Things (IoT) technology has 
revolutionized every aspect of everyday life by making 
everything smarter. Among the vast range of IoT 
applications, IoT based smart agriculture has fascinated 
many researchers and has used Machine Learning(M L) 
and IoT technologies to conduct innovative researches. IoT 
based data-driven farm management techniques can help 
increase agricultural yields by planning input costs, 
reducing losses, and using resources more efficiently. The 
IoT generates big amount da ta with different 
characteristics based on location and time. To improve 
productivity of agriculture through intelligent farm 
management, the data analyzing must be well analyzed 
and processed. High-performance computing capability in 
ML opens up new oppor tunities for data -intensive science 
as the amount of data collected increases; ML algorithms 
could be applied to further enhance application 
intelligence and functionality. In this article we review 
existing approaches have been made to the smart 
agriculture and farming based on IoT and ML separately. 
Also we propose novel concepts that how can ML -IoT can 
be blended in such applications. 
Keywords— Internet of Things (IoT), Machine Learning (ML), 
Machine Learning in IoT(MLIoT), Smart Agriculture, Smart 
Farming. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The Internet of Things focuses on automating processes by 
reducing human-human interaction. In the automation process, 
the IoT uses electronic sensors to collect data, the controller 
processes the data, and the actuators complete the auto mation 
process. The focus of the IoT in agriculture is to automate all 
aspects of agriculture and agricultural methods to make the 
process quite efficient. Traditional methods of yield 
management, livestock management, weed management, soil 
management, wat er management, plant management and 
animal tracking are not fully automated and inefficient, 
including increased human interaction, increased labor costs 
and increased power consumption. Many researchers have 
focused on intelligent systems that monitor and control 
agricultural parameters by increasing productivity and 
efficiency. Intelligent systems collect data for measurements 
and get accurate results which can take the appropriate action. 
Current uses of smart farming systems include collecting data 
on e nvironmental parameters such as soil moisture level, 
humidity, temperature, and pH levels. ML is a new way of 
computing intelligence using machines. A vast range of ML 
applications are also exist on smart agriculture and farming. 
Yield prediction, water ma nagement ,live stock management 
are the few example for application of ML in this field. Its 
observed that there are various researches have been done for 
smart agriculture in IoT and ML individually. In this research 
we review those solutions and propose how ML and IoT blend 
for better and precision agriculture [1] [2] [3]. 
II. AGRICULTURAL IOT 
Structures for IoT based agriculture have been introduced in 
several research papers [4] [5]. In generally, in an IoT 
solution, each sensor mote includes a microcontroller, multiple 
types of sensors (from simple temperature sensors to cameras), 
actuators, and wireless interfaces. These wireless interfaces 
could be WiFi, LoRaWAN, Zigbee etc. A local WSN gateway 
sends data through an Internet gateway and forms the network 
layer. To understand the data collected by the service tier, you 
need to perform data processing such as data visualization, 
data analysis, data storage, and protection. Ultimately, the 
application layer is the most important part here, allowing end 
users to control and monitor various processes in the farm and 
make important decisions based on forecasts, market trends. 
IoT-based agriculture has resulted in a variety of data 
generated from various sources on and around agricultural 
farms, in the form of vo ltage values to images, actuator states 
to robot positions. Quality data leads to quality and accurate 
information. Without having quality information, you won’t 
be able to create predictive models using ML algorithms. 
Applying ML algorithms to these improved datasets allows for 
better analysis and accurate predictions. The IoT can easily 
collect and manage large amounts of data collected from 
sensors and integrate cloud computing services such as 
agricultural maps and cloud storage. Real -time data access 
from anywhere, anytime, enabling real -time monitoring and 
end-to-end connectivity between all parties [6] 

--- Page 2 ---

 International Journal of Engineering Applied Sciences and Technology, 2020 
 Vol. 4, Issue 12, ISSN No. 2455-2143, Pages 24-27 
 Published Online April 2020 in IJEAST (http://www.ijeast.com) 
 
25 
 
III. MACHINE LEARNING APPLICATIONS IN IOT 
BASED AGRICULTURE 
Machine learning (ML) could be consider as a novel way for 
machines to simulate humans le arning activities, gain new 
knowledge, continually improve performance, and ac hieve 
unique maturity. In past few years, ML has been very 
successful in algorithms, theories, and applications, combined 
with other agricultural techniques to minimize crop cost s and 
maximize yield. ML applications on agricultural farms can be 
widely used in areas such as disease detection, crop detection, 
irrigation planning, soil conditions, weed detection, crop 
quality, and weather forecasting. ML for analyzing the 
freshness of produce can be found after harvest (Freshness of 
fruits and vegetables), Shelf life, Product quality, Market 
analysis etc. ML application in IoT based agriculture could be 
based on main ML algorithms such as support vector machine 
(SVM), naive Bayes, di scriminant analysis, K -nearest 
neighbor, , K -means clustering, fuzzy clustering, Gaussian 
mixture models, artificial neural networks (ANN), decision 
making and deep learning [7],[8],[9].[10]. 
 
A. Plant Management 
Hybrid of ML and the IoT provides appropriate and 
controllable environment for growing crops through 
greenhouse technology. However, the spatio -temporal 
variability of crop growth environmental parameters and their 
mutual effects in protected agriculture make it difficult for 
traditional agriculture and environmental regulations to adapt 
to the growth of different types of plants at different stages of 
growth. Therefore, higher accuracy is needed from a 
monitoring and control perspective. Many works existing on 
designing and testing types of monitoring and control systems 
for adjusting temperature and humidity, brightness, CO2 
concentration and other environmental parameters for the 
Internet of Things, technical an d economic results. It is 
proposed that controlling the environment conditions for a 
specific type of plant can be controlled through IoT, sensors 
and actuators. Here the rules of controlling condition can done 
according to a Artificial Neural Network(ANN) setup at IoT 
cloud. [11] [12] [13] 
 
B. Crop and Yield Management 
ML based y ield mapping could apply in farms based on 
collected data over IoT network through yield monitoring 
connected through GPS. The collected date which reveals the 
yield details will be mapped based on the types of farm land. 
Apart from that, ML systems together with IoT c an use to 
predict and improve the yields in agriculture. Farmers rely 
mainly on agricultural experts to make decisions. Farmers and 
others use these systems without any knowledge of computer 
use. ML system can be used for crop production. This is a 
knowledge building system that generates information using 
existing knowledge. This enables farmers to make 
economically sound crop management decisions. Various such 
systems have been developed in view of the success of expert 
systems. The Internet of Things pla ys an important role in 
agriculture. Related works shows that ML systems can be built 
on the IoT and can make recommendations on the use of input 
data collected in real time [14] [15] 
 
C. Soil Management 
Several ML -based approaches can be applied to soil 
management. Soil data can be collected from wireless sensor 
nodes deployed on site. The n, collected data can be fed into 
ML algorithms to predict and analyze soil properties or 
classify the types of soil using supervised ML algorithms. 
Moreover most commonl y used ML algorithms, K-nearest 
neighbor, support vector regression (SVR), Naive Bayes, etc. 
can be use to predict soil dryness based on precipitation and 
evaporative hydrology data [16] [17] [18] 
 
D. Diseases Management 
Blended ML and IoT can be used to id entify and manage 
diseases in agricultural fields. ML methods further stimulate 
appropriate pesticides to protect crops from these infections 
and reduce labor. Such system assists producers by obtaining 
statistics and planning fertilizers, pesticides and i rrigation 
accordingly. By accurately identifying the disease and 
providing accurate pesticide application and irrigation 
schemes, grape visibility and volume have been increased and 
extreme pesticide use reduced. Furthermore, architecture with 
deep learning methods for identifying and classifying speech 
steps of various plants. The audio steps at these factories are 
based on real -time captured visual information and travel 
through different areas of the farm via IoT -based camera 
sensor nodes deployed in crop field [19] [20]. 
 
E. Weed Management 
Weed management is essentials for any farming. Weed 
mapping through ML has been investigated [21] [22]. To 
optimize this, we propose unmanned flying machine to take 
images and map weed in a field. Where flying machine can be 
control through an IoT network. Advanced IoT technologies 
such as NB -IoT can use to handle and manipulate large 
amount of data. 
 
F. Water Management 
Several systems have been implement on controlling water 
supply for a agriculture field as well as ana lyzing the water 
quality using ML [23] [24]. It can be develop intelligent 
systems that detect ground parameters such as soil moisture, 
soil temperature, and environmental con ditions using IoT 
sensors. Then, use the same data to predict outdoor relative 
humidity. In addition, we can use hybrid machine learning and 

--- Page 3 ---

 International Journal of Engineering Applied Sciences and Technology, 2020 
 Vol. 4, Issue 12, ISSN No. 2455-2143, Pages 24-27 
 Published Online April 2020 in IJEAST (http://www.ijeast.com) 
 
26 
 
IoT systems to control water temperature and adjust to 
ambient temperature in intelligent way. 
 
G. Animal Tracking 
Animal tracking of an agriculture field is really important. 
Several researches have been made on tracking animals using 
IoT based sensors, and separate researches are carried on 
animal type classification [25] [26]. Together IoT and ML 
solution could solve this problem efficiency. Sensing the 
presence of an animal can be detected thro ugh IoT sensors. 
Traced animal can be classified and or else can study their 
living patterns, movements using ML techniques 
IV. SUMMERY 
IoT-ML based agriculture is the next evolutional thing in 
smart agricultural and smart farming. Applying ML 
algorithms to data generated from various inputs from farms 
with the help of the agricultural IoT can make the system 
smarter and provide definitive information and make 
predictions. In this study, we analyze existing ML applications 
in agriculture, from process to re sults, each with its own 
strengths and weaknesses. Later, because most ML 
applications needed real -time data to train predictive 
algorithms, suggestions were made to implement new 
applications on the IoT. Farm management systems are 
evolving into reality b y applying machine learning to sensor 
data Artificial intelligence (AI) system that provides richer 
suggestions and insights for subsequent work decisions and 
actions with a range of final production improvements. In the 
future, this range will be expect and enable wider use of ML models. 
V. REFERENCES 
[1] M. Popa, O. Prostean ,and A.S. Popa, (2019) Machine 
Learning Approach for Agricultural IoT In Proc. 
International Journal of Recent Technology and 
Engineering (IJRTE),(pp 22-29) 
[2] Medela, et al. (2013 ) IoT Multipl atform networking to 
monitor and control wineries and vineyards. In: Future 
Network and Mobile Summit,” IEEE,( pp. 1–10) 
[3] Mohammad Saeid Mahdavinejad, et al (2018) Machine 
learning for internet of t hings data analysis: a survey in 
proc. Digital Communicatio ns and Network, (pp, 161 –
175) 
[4] Andreas Kamilaris, et al.(2016) Agri-IoT: A Semantic 
Framework for Internet of Things-enabled Smart Farming 
Applications,” European Union. 
[5] Prem Prakash Jayaraman, et al., (2018) Internet of Things 
Platform for Smart Farming: E xperiences and Lessons 
Learnt,in proc Sensors, (pp 16, 1884) 
[6] Castelli, Mauro, et al., (2018) Supervised Learning: 
Classification, Ref erence Module in Life Sciences,in 
proc. Elsevier. 
[7] R. L. F. Cunha, B. Silva and M. A. S. Netto, (2018) A 
Scalable Machine Lea rning System for Pre -Season 
Agriculture Yield Forecast," 2018 IEEE 14th 
International Conference on e -Science (e -Science), 
Amsterdam, 2018, (pp. 423-430). 
[8] S. Dimitriadis and C. Goumopoulos, (2008)"Applying 
Machine Learning to Extract New Knowledge in 
Precision Agriculture Applications," 2008 Panhellenic 
Conference on Informatics, Samos, 2008, (pp. 100-104). 
[9] T. Siddique, D. Barua, Z. Ferdous and A. Chakrabarty, 
"Automated farming prediction,( 2017 ) Intelligent 
Systems Conference (IntelliSys), London, 2017, (pp. 757-
763). 
[10] M. T. Shakoor, K. Rahman, S. N. Rayta and A. 
Chakrabarty, 2017 Agricultural production output 
prediction using Supervise d Machine Learning 
techniques, 1st International Conference on Next 
Generation Computing Applications (NextComp ), 
Mauritius, ( pp. 182-187). 
[11] M. V. Ramesh et al. (2017), "Water quality monitoring 
and waste management using IoT," 2017 IEEE Global 
Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC), San Jose, 
CA, (pp. 1-7) 
[12] C. J. G. Aliac and E. Maravillas, (2018) "IOT 
Hydroponics Managemen t System," 2018 IEEE 10th 
International Conference on Humanoid, Nanotechnology, 
Information Technology,Communication and Control, 
Environment and Management (HNICEM) , Baguio City, 
Philippines, (pp. 1-5). 
[13] R. N. Rao and B. Sridhar, (2018) "IoT based smart cr op-
field monitoring and automation irrigation system," 2018 
2nd International Conference on Inventive Systems and 
Control (ICISC), Coimbatore, 2018, pp. 478-483. 
[14] A. A. Araby et al., "Smart IoT Monitoring System for 
Agriculture with Predictive Analysis," 20 19 8th 
International Conference on Modern Circuits and Systems 
Technologies (MOCAST), Thessaloniki, Greece, 2019 ,( 
pp. 1-4) 
[15] S. Dimitriadis and C. Goumopoulos, (2008 ) Applying 
Machine Learning to Extract New Knowledge in 
Precision Agriculture Applications," 2008 Panhellenic 
Conference on Informatics, Samos, ( pp. 100-104) 
[16] O. Pandithurai, S. Aishwarya, B. Aparna and K. 
Kavitha,(2017) "Agro-tech: A digital model for 
monitoring soil and crops using internet of things (IOT)," 
In proc. 2017 Third International Co nference on Science 
Technology Engineering & Manage ment (ICONSTEM), 
Chennai, (pp. 342-346) 
[17] N. Ananthi, J. Divya, M. Divya and V. Janani, (2017) IoT 
based smart soil monitoring system for agricultural 
production," 2017 IEEE Technological Innovations in 
ICT f or Agriculture and Rural De velopment (TIAR), 
Chennai, ( pp. 209-214) 

--- Page 4 ---

 International Journal of Engineering Applied Sciences and Technology, 2020 
 Vol. 4, Issue 12, ISSN No. 2455-2143, Pages 24-27 
 Published Online April 2020 in IJEAST (http://www.ijeast.com) 
 
27 
 
[18] S. Athani, C. H. Tejeshwar, M. M. Pa til, P. Patil and R. 
Kulkarni, (2017) Soil moisture monitoring using IoT 
enabled arduino sensors with neural networks for 
improving soil management for farmers and predict 
seasonal rainfall for planning future harvest in North 
Karnataka — India," 2017 International Conference on I -
SMAC (IoT in Social, Mobile, Analytics and Cloud) (I-
SMAC), Palladam, ( pp. 43-48) 
[19] A. Adedoja, P. A. Owolawi and T. Mapayi, (2019) Deep 
Learning Based on NASNet for Plant Disease 
Recognition Using Leave Images," 2019 International 
Conference on Advances in Big Data, Computing and 
Data Communication Systems (icABCD) , Winterton, 
South Africa, ( pp. 1-5). 
[20] N. Materne and M. Inoue, (2018) IoT Monitoring System 
for Early Detection of Agricultural Pests and Diseases," 
2018 12th South East Asian Technical University 
Consortium (SEATUC), Yogyakarta, Indonesia, (pp. 1-5). 
[21] M. Pérez -Ortiz, P. A. Gutiérrez, J. M. Peña, J. Torres -
Sánchez, F. Ló pez-Granados and C. Hervás -Martínez, 
"Machine learning paradigms for weed mapping via 
unmanned aerial vehicles," 2016 IEEE Symposium Series 
on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), Athens, 2016, pp. 
1-8.. 
[22] [22] S. T., S. T., S. G. G.S., S. S. and R. Kumaraswam y, 
"Performance Comparison of Weed Detection 
Algorithms," 2019 International Conference on 
Communication and Signal Processing (ICCSP), Chennai, 
India, 2019, pp. 0843-0847. 
[23] [23] Y. Khan and C. S. See, "Predicting and analyzing 
water quality using Machine L earning: A comprehensive 
model," 2016 IEEE Long Island Systems, Applications 
and Technology Conference (LISAT), Farmingdale, NY, 
2016, pp. 1-6. 
[24] [24] M. R. Machado, T. R. Júnior, M. R. Silva and J. B. 
Martins, "Smart Water Management System using the 
Microcontroller ZR16S08 as IoT Solution," 2019 IEEE 
10th Latin American Symposium on Circuits & Systems 
(LASCAS), Armenia, Colombia, 2019, pp. 169-172. 
[25] [25] L. Nóbrega, A. Tavares, A. Cardoso and P. 
Gonçalves, "Animal monitoring based on IoT 
technologies," 2018 IoT Vertical and Topical Summit on 
Agriculture - Tuscany (IOT Tuscany), Tuscany, 2018, pp. 
1-5. 
[26] [26] H. Yousif, J. Yuan, R. Kays and Z. He, "Fast human -
animal detection from highly cluttered camera -trap 
images using joint background modeling and deep 
learning classification," 2017 IEEE International 
Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Baltimore, 
MD, 2017, pp. 1-4