--- Page 1 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an
Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique
PEDRO ANDRADE, IV ANOVITCH SILV A, MARIANNE DINIZ, and THOMMAS FLORES,Federal
University of Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil
DANIEL G. COSTA, INEGI, Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Portugal
EDUARDO SOARES, Lancaster University, United Kingdom
The Internet of Things (IoT) has made it possible to include everyday objects in a connected network, allowing them to
intelligently process data and respond to their environment. Thus, it is expected that those objects will gain an intelligent
understanding of their environment and be able to process data more eiciently than before. Particularly, such edge com-
puting paradigm has allowed the execution of inference methods on resource-constrained devices such as microcontrollers,
signiicantly changing the way IoT applications have evolved in recent years. However, although this scenario has supported
the development of Tiny Machine Learning (TinyML) approaches on such devices, there are still some challenges that require
further investigation when optimizing data streaming on the edge. Therefore, this article proposes a new unsupervised
TinyML regression technique based on the typicality and eccentricity of the samples to be processed. Moreover, the proposed
technique also exploits a Recursive Least Squares (RLS) ilter approach. Combining all these features, the proposed method
uses similarities between samples to identify patterns when processing data streams, predicting outcomes based on these
patterns. The results obtained through the extensive experimentation utilizing vehicular data streams were highly encouraging.
The proposed algorithm was meticulously compared with the RLS algorithm and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). It
exhibited signiicantly superior performance, with mean squared errors that were 4.68 and 12.02 times lower, respectively,
compared to the aforementioned techniques.
CCS Concepts: · Computer systems organization → Embedded systems ; Algorithm; Edge Computing; · Machine
Learning→ Tiny Machine Learning (TinyML).
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Eccentricity, Typicality, TinyML, Unsupervised Learning, Regression, Vehicular networks.
1 INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a rapidly growing communication paradigm that predicts that everyday objects
will be equipped with microcontrollers and communication capabilities, allowing users to have greater immersion
and deeper interactions through new applications and services in areas such as agriculture, medical assistance,
smart city systems and industrial automation [ 23, 26, 69]. Cisco’s Global Cloud Index estimates that nearly 26.9
billion devices will be part of the IoT landscape by 2026 [ 3]. However, the large variety of IoT applications and
devices, as well as their trend for heterogeneity, makes it challenging to develop a solution to fulill all the
presented requirements. This challenge has motivated an increase in the number of approaches for IoT systems
Authors’ addresses: Pedro Andrade, pedro.meira.055@ufrn.edu.br; Ivanovitch Silva, ivanovitch.silva@ufrn.edu.br; Marianne Diniz, marianne.
diniz.086@ufrn.edu.br; Thommas Flores, thommas.lores.101@ufrn.edu.br, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, Lagoa Nova, Natal,
RN, Brazil, 59078-900; Daniel G. Costa, danielgcosta@fe.up.pt, INEGI, Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal; Eduardo
Soares, edu.soares999@gmail.com, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for proit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the irst page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciic permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from
permissions@acm.org.
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
1539-9087/2023/4-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3591356
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 2 ---

2 • Andrade et al.
design, some of which are not practical in many ways. In this scenario of novelties, Cloud computing and Edge
computing are essential concepts for IoT platforms, gaining a lot of attention lately [27, 78].
Most IoT platforms have relied on cloud computing when performing machine learning tasks [ 16]. For that,
raw data streams are usually transmitted toward the cloud, or even considering only minimal processing before
data transmission. Raw data streams are usually transmitted toward the cloud or even considering only minimal
processing before data transmission. However, given the high volume of IoT data streams in many applications,
it becomes hard to deal with this communication scenario that may be easily associated with excessive energy
consumption and increased infrastructural problems [ 47, 56]. IoT platforms are increasingly shifting towards
edge computing, where data is processed on devices rather than in the cloud, to reduce data transmission and
associated energy consumption and infrastructure issues. Edge computing can also reduce latency by bringing
distributed computing closer to the data source. By processing data on edge, more straightforward tasks can be
handled locally, leaving the cloud server to focus on more complex demands that require greater computational
power [17].
Computing on the edge of an application often requires some data treatment, opening up the possibility of
using machine learning (ML) techniques for that. However, in many applications, the employed devices are
resource constrained, operating with microcontrollers (MCU) with limited processing and storage capabilities. In
such a way, MCU-based devices impose an inherent challenge to the execution of complex machine learning
algorithms [
63]. In this context, a concept known in the literature as Tiny Machine Learning (TinyML) has
emerged [62], which is indeed focused on itting ML models for devices with limited resources [71].
Generally speaking, it is necessary to seek the best trade-of between the adopted restricted hardware and the
software endowed with an ML algorithm for a desired application [ 2]. Currently, TinyML is more often applied
for audio processing, computer vision, and natural language processing problems [ 41]. However, with the advent
of smart city initiatives, other areas have become suitable for TinyML. In fact, some development platforms
and libraries such as TensorFlow, PyTorch and Scikit-Learn are already been exploited to support the expected
TinyML revolution [22, 53].
This article developed a regression algorithm based on the TinyML principle targeted at interconnected vehicles.
The proposed algorithm is based on the TEDA algorithm [ 5] designed for the detection of data outliers, and
the AutoCloud algorithm [ 12] used for data classiication/clustering. We have adapted these algorithms to the
context of regression problems, particularly for a vehicular application scenario due to the dynamics of the input
process, which is quite fast and more adapted to the intended data stream [55, 72].
Therefore, in this emerging context of the Internet of Intelligent Vehicles (IoIV), which highly relies on
embedded sensors [ 60], the proposed algorithm will be exploited to predict the instantaneous fuel consumption
of the considered vehicles. Such prediction will allow a vehicle’s fuel system to calculate the amount of fuel
needed for acceleration, which could save fuel when accurately predicted. Since computer-driven sensors already
collect data about several variables in a modern vehicle, providing eiciency and maintenance data as well as
indirect data to improve the driving experience, the TinyML-based processing of such data could provide relevant
information that can not only improve the eiciency of the vehicles but also its signiicance within a smart city
context [34].
The contributions of this article are threefold. First, a new lightweight online unsupervised regression technique
will be developed following the principles of the TinyML paradigm, i.e., the developed technique requires low
computational efort and low energy consumption, and can be embedded in resource-constrained devices. Second,
a comprehensive analysis of the coniguration parameters and the acceptable ranges for the algorithm settings
will be conducted, including discussions about the weights of the recursive least squares ilters. Finally, the
proposed approach will be evaluated considering classic methods in the literature, bringing important comparison
results. Such contributions are very signiicant to this research area and they have not been proposed before to
the best of our knowledge.
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 3 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 3
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 brings recent developments in the areas of
Internet of Things, Edge computing, and TinyML. Section 3 describes the fundamentals of TEDA and AutoCloud,
two algorithms that were used as the basis for our regression technique. The proposed approach is described in
Section 4. Section 5 presents the experimental results, discussing the performed comparisons and achievements.
Finally, Section 6 presents our conclusions, followed by the references of this work.
2 RELATED WORKS
Today, the Internet of Things (IoT) is everywhere. From refrigerators to intelligent lights, from sensors to
microphones, from smart vehicles to personal assistants, these devices and the networks they create provide
the cornerstone for several applications in areas such as autonomous vehicles and smart cities [ 1, 66]. Actually,
IoT applications can get very complex, with potentially hundreds of data sources ( e.g., sensors and actuators
sending diferent data types to the cloud in massive quantities [ 76]). This scenario opens up the possibility of
decentralizing data computation by bringing it to the edge of the applications, known as łedge computingž [ 39].
According to [70], edge computing refers to computing resources that are physically close to the middle of
a network. These resources act as both data consumers and data generators/producers, with local sensors and
actuators constantly monitoring a device while it operates in its environment. In essence, this means that more
tools are on the scene, instead of just data collectors. Another deinition of edge computing was developed
in [81], deining three layers of computing: cloud, fog, and edge. Starting at the bottom, the edge computing layer
represents the sensors and actuators on the conceptual łedgež of the applications, with the other layers providing
connectivity with diferent abstractions and transmission ranges. While fog nodes contain routers, gateways, and
hubs, the cloud is usually implemented as a software platform for centralized data processing for many other
kinds of applications, with lower latency but higher processing and storage capacity when compared to the edge
layer.
Data processing is usually reasonably reduced in the edge layer, but this scenario has been changing with
machine learning techniques for low-resource devices, as presented in this work. Unfortunately, limitations in
computational power make it challenging to deploy machine learning algorithms on edge devices. In fact, TinyML
addresses this issue by processing local data but only transmitting necessary information to the cloud for further
computation. This avoids the consumption of a large amount of bandwidth and thus decreases communication
costs [66].
Indeed, in recent years, edge computing and TinyML have emerged as a major trend. Incorporating low-energy
microcontroller units (MCUs), for example, has enabled electronic devices to be more intelligent in everything
from industrial monitoring sensors to refrigerator controllers. In short, MCUs are cheap, widespread, have low
energy consumption, and are presented in reduced size usually in a single-chip implementation. However, their
main constraints are the reduced memory (KB or MB) and their low-frequency processors [4, 71].
The possibility of running machine-learning techniques with energy consumption on the order of ?? opens
up a wide variety of applications [ 79]. TinyML systems are more than two to three orders of magnitude cheaper
and more power-eicient than traditional machine learning systems [ 40]. On the other hand, cloud-based machine
learning conigurations cost more in terms of battery power, network bandwidth, and latency time. Therefore,
these issues can limit the deployment of many models for problems where data is generated [ 28]. There are also
initiatives aimed at implementing ML algorithms in ultra-resource-constrained printed circuits such as [ 8] and
[49] that focus on popular classiication algorithms.
Recent works in the ield of TinyML have exploited two major approaches. The irst strategy is to use machine
learning development libraries and tools to deploy models into microcontrollers. Libraries such as TensorFlow,
PyTorch, and Scikit-Learn have the function of porting models to run on microcontrollers based on quantization
and pruning approaches [ 79]. Those libraries allow taking a model trained in another environment and applying
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 4 ---

4 • Andrade et al.
it in a resource-constrained device. In this case, it is common for the TinyML solutions to use any supervised
learning model [58]. On the other hand, the second strategy consists of adding a co-processor, i.e., a more powerful
computational device, to perform in an initial phase of training to make inferences. Meanwhile, on the edge
device, there would only be the model retraining with the updating of the weights, based on new input data.
Another possibility for this strategy is to use the most robust hardware only when the edge system detects more
complex situations, then the co-processor takes over the task, updates the model, and ports this new knowledge
to the embedded system. In this type of approach, the used techniques can be either supervised or unsupervised.
The contributions in this article do not it into any of these previously mentioned approaches, as the developed
technique does not require prior knowledge of the data or a training phase. The proposed model is unsupervised
and it is trained with the input of new data, having the ability to adapt to changes and concept evolution.
Considering diferent ways to develop, deploy and train TinyML models, it is possible to mention and classify
many works in the literature that have been devoted to using machine learning techniques on devices with
limited resources. For the approach through supervised training and then quantization, we can cite, for example,
[48]. In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, they have proposed a face mask detection architecture for
implementation in microcontrollers. A trained TinyML model is quantized using the TensorFlow Lite framework.
Another solution was implemented to detect coughs in real-time on an Arduino Nano BLE Sense through training
a dataset of coughs running under only 20 KB RAM memory [68].
Neural networks can be optimized in several ways as shown in [ 7], where one of the possibilities is through the
use of pruning and quantization techniques. The TinyML literature contains a collection of contributions for dis-
cretely packing compression neural network-based models into devices with limited resources. For instance, [ 24]
used statistical quantization of a neural network model to estimate the parameters of a battery in a microcontroller.
A more complex model based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with a reduced size was also deployed
onto a memory-limited microcontroller unit [ 29]. Network pruning was used to increase the generalization
performance for a classiication problem and satisfy the reduced-memory constraints. A similar idea was also
used to reduce the computational inference demand on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), where quantized
matrices were adopted [ 44]. Quantized neural networks adapted to resource-constrained devices have also been
implemented in other contexts, such as for detecting feeding events [ 51], keyword spotting applications [ 15, 18],
for multiple purpose uses [74, 77] and IoT applications [10, 35, 46].
Regarding the strategy that uses co-processing to perform training outside the edge device, there are approaches
with all types of supervision. Additionally, in some references there is the use of techniques with online learning,
after an initial phase of training and learning [ 50], [ 57]. The work in [ 50] is quite complete, as it compares
supervised (CNN), unsupervised (SOM), semi-supervised (CNN + SOM), and online unsupervised (DSOM)
techniques, bringing important results to the area.
The work in [59] also uses the concepts of online learning and it is called TinyOL (TinyML with online learning).
First, training is carried out using the pre-collected data. Thus, the TinyOL technique allows updating the layer’s
weights in the online setting, not needing to store the historical data for future training. In [ 20], initially, the DNN
(Deep Neural Network) is trained, and then a post-training quantization based on a hyperparameter optimization
technique is performed, enabling faster computing on resource-constrained devices ( e.g., edge devices) for online
learning applications. The work in [ 25] also introduces a knowledge transfer mechanism obtained from Deep
Learning and KNN models trained on a more powerful computational unit. After training, there is continuous
support for the embedded system on the edge. Diferently, authors in [ 9] focused on object detection. A Shallow
Neural Network (SHNN) is implemented on the edge device, being connected with a DNN that resides on the
most powerful device. In many cases, the DNN will not be needed and a shallower model will suice. However,
when signiicant changes occur, the DNN is used and must transfer the knowledge to the shallow model, updating
its weights. Finally, an online training concept is proposed in [ 45] for computer vision applications using NVIDIA
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 5 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 5
Jetson. Whenever a new object class is detected, a new neural network model will be started from the weights of
the previous models. Model training is performed in the fog and then passed to the application edge device.
Therefore, after an extensive literature review, it is possible to notice that initiatives to apply unsupervised
TinyML algorithms are rare (Table 1). The possibility of integrating TinyML techniques directly into microcon-
trollers allows local training and model generation in the IoT device itself. This can improve the accuracy of the
model and enable the implementation of online techniques capable of responding satisfactorily to data streams,
including critical applications.
Table 1. Related literature on Machine Learning and TinyML. The presented ML-related techniques are: KNN (k-nearest
Neighbors), ANN (Artificial Neural Network), RNN (Recurrent Neural Network), DNN (Deep Neural Network), SVM (Support
Vector Machine), SHNN (Shallow Neural Network), RF (Random Forests), SOM (Self-Organizing Maps) and DSOM (Dynamic
SOM).
Year TinyML pruning Learning Base technique Work
2021 quantization supervised CNN [48]
2020 quantization supervised ANN [68]
2020 quantization supervised ANN [24]
2019 quantization supervised CNN [29]
2019 quantization supervised ANN [44]
2020 quantization supervised ANN [51]
2021 quantization supervised RNN [15]
2020 quantization supervised RNN [18]
2020 quantization supervised ANN, SVM, RF [74]
2019 quantization supervised ANN [77]
2016 quantization supervised DNN [35]
2020 quantization supervised ANN [46]
2021 quantization supervised ANN [10]
2020 co-processing both CNN, SOM, DSOM [50]
2021 co-processing both Autoencoder + ANN [59]
2022 co-processing supervised DNN [20]
2020 co-processing unsupervised SVM and KNN [25]
2020 co-processing supervised SHNN and DNN [9]
2019 co-processing supervised DNN [45]
2022 online learning unsupervised AutoCloud + TEDA proposed
3 TEDA AND AUTOCLOUD ALGORITHMS
This section explores the TEDA and AutoCloud algorithms, both used as a basis for the new proposal. TEDA is a
streaming algorithm proposed by Angelov in 2014 [ 5], while AutoCloud is an evolutionary clustering algorithm
based on TEDA concepts developed in [12].
In [5], Angelov presents an anomaly detection algorithm for data streams called TEDA, which exploits the
typicality and eccentricity concepts to achieve its results. Typicality is the similarity of a sample to the rest of the
set based on distances between samples. Eccentricity is the opposite, indicating how diferent a sample is from
the rest of the collected data. A sample with high eccentricity indicates that it could be an outlier.
TEDA has advantages over traditional statistical methods for detecting anomalies. Since there is no need for
prior knowledge of the data, it is widely used for data streams and time series, having the ability to detect changes
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 6 ---

6 • Andrade et al.
and the evolution of concepts. In order to use the algorithm, it is not necessary to know the mathematical model
or the data distribution, which is an important advantage for real-world problems [ 75]. TEDA measures the
typicality and eccentricity of each sample through geometric distances (Euclidean, cosine, or Mahalanobis), thus
the computational efort is low and fast.
In addition to the related works previously mentioned, we could cite other relevant research eforts that have
presented improvements to the TEDA algorithm. First, by expanding and generalizing the scope of the algorithm,
we have the works in [ 12], [43] and [42]. Moreover, considering applications to real problems, we have [ 71] for
data compression, [4] for detection of road anomalies, [ 75] for weather data, and [ 13] for industrial processes.
These works are good indications of the recent interest in the TEDA algorithm, highlighting its relevance in
many practical scenarios.
The AutoCloud algorithm is like TEDA where its data processing is recursive and it does not require large
memory space, as it performs using batch processing tasks or sliding windows. Therefore, it is a fast algorithm
that requires low computational efort, being a good solution for resource-constrained devices and real-time
problems, such as in TinyML applications. Furthermore, it is a completely unsupervised algorithm and it also
does not need oline training or prior data knowledge. In [ 12], it is highlighted that this algorithm is able to deal
with two typical data stream problems: concept drift and concept evolution.
The most signiicant contribution of AutoCloud is the use of DataClouds, which are granular structures
similar to traditional clusters. However, unlike traditional clusters, DataClouds are grouped according to common
statistical properties. Thus, a DataCloud is modeled by three properties: the number of samples ( ??
?
), as well as
both the mean ( ??
? ) and the variance ([ ? 2] ?
?
) of the samples that have been associated with that cloud ?? at the
time instant ?. Finally, DataClouds have no speciic form or boundaries. It is noteworthy that the input data does
not need to be stored in memory, but is only used to update the cloud to which it belongs.
For each new input data, AutoCloud calculates the normalized eccentricity for each cloud ( [ ??( ??)] ) where ??
is the new data, as deined in Eq. 1.
??( ??) = 1
2[ ??
?] +
( ??
?− ??) ?( ??
?− ??)
2[ ??
?][ ? 2] ?
?
(1)
If the eccentricity is highly relative to a cloud, the new data is irrelevant to that cloud. However, if the normalized
eccentricity is low and satisies the condition in Eq. 2, with ? representing the algorithm’s sensitivity, the input
sample is similar to the previous samples that were associated with that DataCloud and therefore the data also
belongs to the cloud ?.
??( ??)≤ ? 2+ 1
2??
?
(2)
As previously mentioned, the DataCloud is a concept within the AutoCloud algorithm that deines the input
data stream to be considered, which is deined by granular structures grouped according to common statistical
properties. Its variables are recursively updated as expressed in Eq. 3, Eq. 4, and Eq. 5.
[ ??
?] = ??
?− 1+ 1 (3)
[ ??
?] =
[ ??
?]− 1
[ ??
?] ??
?− 1+ 1
[ ??
?] ?? (4)
[[ ? 2] ?
?] =
[ ??
?]− 1
[ ??
?] [ ? 2] ?
?+ 1
[ ??
?]
/bardblex
/bardblex ??−[ ??
?]
/bardblex
/bardblex 2 (5)
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 7 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 7
The same input data can belong to more than one DataCloud, just as in a fuzzy set. And if the eccentricity
of the data in relation to all other clouds is too high, a new DataCloud will be created. To avoid the disorderly
creation of new DataClouds, the algorithm merges two clouds when the number of samples belonging to the two
clouds is considerably high. For the automatic merging of cloud
?and cloud ?, at least one of the conditions in Eq.
6 and Eq. 7 must be met (with ???∩ ??
? as the number of intersecting samples at the time instant ?).
???∩ ??
? > ??
?− ???∩ ??
? (6)
???∩ ??
? > ? ?
?− ???∩ ??
? (7)
The algorithm merges automatically and non-parametrically. When there is a merge of two DataClouds, the
properties of the resulting cloud are deined by Eq. 8, Eq. 9, and Eq. 10.
??
? = ??
?+ ? ?
?− ???∩ ??
? (8)
??
? =
??
? ??+ ? ?
? ??
??
?+ ? ?
?
(9)
[ ? 2] ?
? =
( ??
?− 1)[ ? 2] ?+( ? ?
?− 1)[ ? 2] ?
??
?+ ? ?
?− 2
(10)
After describing the main characteristics of both algorithms, we can deine a new technique to improve the
achieved results, as will be presented in the next section.
4 THE PROPOSED TEDA REGRESSOR ALGORITHM
The following subsections will present the development steps and the coniguration parameters of the proposed
algorithm.
4.1 Defining regression rules
Before starting the development of the proposed algorithm, it is important to highlight some considerations.
Regression is a statistical technique for predicting a continuous variable based on one or more predictor variables
[6]. Several research ields have employed regression models, such as Engineering [ 14, 21], Economics [ 33], and
Biology [61]. Time series prediction is a speciic type of regression that is used to predict future values of a
variable based on its past values [ 64]. Time series data are often characterized by temporal dependencies, meaning
that the value of a variable at a given time is inluenced by its previous values as it requires accounting for the
dependencies between observations. [ 65]. In summary, the proposed technique is a time series prediction method
that its within the concept of regression.
According to [37], the most widely used regression technique is linear regression. Its main advantages are its
simplicity, due to its linearity, and it is an oline algorithm well known in the literature. Until this moment, it is
still the predominant empirical tool in Economics.
A linear model assumes that the regression function is linear in terms of the inputs. In this sense, there are
diferent approaches to calculating the parameters of the line, such as the least squares (LS) method, as well as
many diferent modiications of the linear regression algorithm. However, although its popularity, it has some
disadvantages such as the fact it is too simplistic, and also presents some inability to deal with large volumes of
past data.
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 8 ---

8 • Andrade et al.
In this article, we propose the TEDA Regressor, an algorithm aimed at resource-constrained devices. Like
AutoCloud, its main advantages are its simplicity and low computational requirements. TEDA Regressor is an
online algorithm and does not need oline training or prior data knowledge, being a possible solution for the data
stream and TinyML applications. Figure 1 illustrates where the developed technique its into an IoT application:
running on a resource-constrained device, physically close to the data source.
Fig. 1. Conceptual positioning of the proposed technique within an IoT applications scenario.
4.2 Mathematical formulations
As aforementioned, each DataCloud can be modeled by three properties: number of samples ( ??
?
), mean ( ??
? ) and
variance ([ ? 2] ?
?
) of the samples that have been associated with that cloud ?? at the time instant ?. Therefore, the
main diference between the TEDA Regressor and the clustering algorithm (AutoCloud) is the insertion of a
fourth object: an adaptive Recursive Least Square (RLS) ilter, as depicted in Figure 2. In this article, it will be
referred as łRLS ilterž and we will adopt the notation ??
? for the DataCloud ?at time ?. Table 2 summarizes the
diferences between the proposed TEDA Regressor and the existing AutoCloud solution.
Fig. 2. TEDA Regressor representation - inclusion of the fourth object (RLS filter).
According to [67], the RLS ilter is described as a polynomial equation that relates weights and inputs to predict
the iltered output or signal, as expressed in Eq. 11.
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 9 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 9
Table 2. Diferences between AutoCloud and TEDA Regressor.
Characteristic AutoCloud TEDA Regressor
Type Classiication/Clustering Regression
DataCloud properties
number of samples ( ??
? )
number of samples ( ??
? )
mean (??
? ) mean (??
? )
variance ([ ? 2] ?
? )
variance ([ ? 2] ?
? )
- RLS ilter ( ??
? )
??
? = ? ?
1· ??
?− 1+···+ ? ?
?· ??
?− ? (11)
where ?? is the model output, ? ?
? is the weight of cloud ?with ? varying in the range[ 1, ?] where ? is the order
of the RLS ilter.
Finally, ??
?− 1 is the respective entry at the time instant ?− 1. Therefore, the irst parameter deined in TEDA
Regressor will be the number of previously used samples (window) and it will be denoted by ? . The window
size ? is equal to the order ? of the ilter.
Continuing the development of the RLS method for the proposed algorithm, we can rewrite Eq. 11 in vector
form, achieving the new Eq. 12.
??
? = ??
? ? ? (12)
where ??
? denotes the transpose of the input vector.
Thus, the weight matrix must be updated, achieving the Eq. 13.
? ?+ 1 = ? ?+ Δ? ? (13)
The weight update increment ( Δ? ? ) is given by Δ? ? = ?????? , where ?? is the error given by the diference
between the desired output ( ?? ) and the model output ( ?? ). The value of ?? can be computed as ?? = ??− ?? .
Finally, ?? is the inverse of the autocorrelation matrix, which is expressed by Eq. 14.
?? = 1
?( ??− 1−
??− 1????
? ??− 1
?+ ??
? ??− 1??
) (14)
where ? is the aging factor, which will be the second parameter conigured in the deinition of the algorithm.
The aging factor ?, given in the range from 0 to 1, aims to value the most recent samples more highly than the
oldest ones. According to [ 67], this parameter has this name because past data is exponentially weighted less
than the more recent data. When ? is equal to 1, we have the growing memory case, since, as the length of the
data grows, the efect of the oldest data is not attenuated. In contrast, the exponentially decaying memory case
(? < 1) is more suitable for time-varying applications (time series). Some details about this parameter will be
discussed in Section 5.
The initial value of the autocorrelation matrix should be set to ? 0 = 1
? ?, where ? is a small positive constant
and ? is the identity matrix of order ?. To implement the RLS ilter in the algorithm, it was adopted an open
source library, Padasip1 (Python Adaptive Signal Processing ), developed for adaptive signal processing.
As with AutoCloud, the proposed TEDA Regressor prevents the uncontrolled creation of DataClouds by
merging the conditions deined in Eq. 6 or Eq. 7. DataCloud’s characterizing properties (number of samples,
mean, and variance) are also updated according to Eq. 8, Eq. 9, and Eq. 10.
1Padasip library: https://matousc89.github.io/padasip/
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 10 ---

10 • Andrade et al.
The third introduced parameter is the sensitivity of the method, which acts as a threshold to determine whether
or not a sample ?? belongs to DataCloud ??. The ?? -threshold method is a well-known model used to detect
outliers in a Gaussian distributed data set. In a dataset with a large number of samples and any data distribution,
it is possible to use the Chebyshev Inequality, as demonstrated in [ 19]. This inequality states that no more than
1/ ? 2 of the distribution’s values can be ? or more standard deviations away from the mean, considering ? ≥ 1.
We have adapted formulas of [ 11] to be the normalized eccentricity used in this work, and inequality in eq 2,
achieving the rewritten eq 15.
??( ??)≤ ? 2+ 1
2??
?
(15)
Therefore, the value of ? represents the threshold of sensitivity of the method . The larger the value of ? ,
the less sensitive the algorithm will be.
The fourth object, the RLS ilter, will be merged assigning more weights to the ilters of the two DataClouds
that will be merged. The resulting DataCloud weight update will be given by Eq. 16.
? ?
? = ? ?
? + Δ? ?
? (16)
where
Δ? ?
? = ?Δ? ?
?+( 1− ?) Δ? ?
? (17)
where ? is the gain related to the merging of the ilters.
The value ? is a parameter related to the number of samples of each DataCloud, which may be expressed as
? =
? ?
?
? ?
?+ ? ?
?
, considering that cloud ?? has more samples than cloud ??, hence ??
?≥ ? ?
?
. This gain was inserted to
give greater weight to a DataCloud with more samples and, consequently, more signiicance.
In the Deep Learning literature, there are several techniques for initializing the weights of neural networks
in order to substantially improve convergence [ 32]. The works by [ 38] and [ 31] present weight initialization
techniques that lead to faster convergence and that reduce the error of the implemented models. Such techniques
were brought and adapted for our algorithm to initialize the RLS ilters weights and will be named in the article
according to the computational or mathematical function they represent. The initialization of [ 38] uses an
adaptation of the Rectiied Linear Unit (" relu") while [ 31] uses variations of the hyperbolic tangent function
("tanh1" and " tanh2"). The initial weights of the RLS ilters are given by the following Eq. 18:
? 0 = ????( ?− 1, ?)× ? ????? (18)
where ???? represents a function that generates a vector of length equal to the order of the ilter, whose elements
vary between ?− 1 and ? (size of previous sample window). Table 3 presents the multiplicative factor (? ?????) that
was made available from the previously mentioned functions (" relu", "tanh1" and " tanh2") and with the inclusion
of the " zero" option that resets all the weights of the RLS ilters. The four weight initialization conigurations
were compared in Section 5.
After all deined mathematical formulations, Figure 3 and Algorithms 1-3, summarize the proposed TEDA
Regressor algorithm.
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 11 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 11
Table 3. Weight initialization.
Weight
initialization (?) Function factor Based on
0 łzerož 0 -
1 łreluž
︃
2
?− 1 [38]
2 łtanh1ž
︃
1
?− 1 [31]
3 łtanh2ž
︃
2
2?− 1 [31]
Fig. 3. TEDA Regressor: Input, output, and hyperparameters.
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 12 ---

12 • Andrade et al.
Algorithm 1: TEDA Regressor
Data: ? ={ ?1, ?2, ?3, ...}
while ??← new input do
if ? = 1 then
// 1st DataCloud:
? 1
1← 1
?1
1← ?1
[ ? 2] 1
1← 0
?1
1 ← ? 0
? ← 1
end
else if ? = 2 then
// Add ?2 to DataCloud
? 1
2← 2
?1
2←( ?1
1+ ?2)/ 2
[ ? 2] 1
2←
/bardblex
/bardblex ?2−[ ? 2] 1
1
/bardblex
/bardblex / 2
?1
2 ← ? 0
end
else
forall ?? do
calculate ? ?
? , ? ?
? and[ ? 2] ?
? // Eqs: 3, 4, 5.
calculate ??( ??) // Eq: 1
if Eq. 1 is true then
// Add ?? to DataCloud ??
? ?
?←[ ?′] ?
?
??
?←[ ?′] ?
?
[ ? 2] ?
?←[[ ? 2] ′] ?
?
??
? ←[ ?′] ?
?
end
else
? ?
?← ? ?
?− 1
??
?← ??
?− 1
[ ? 2] ?
?←[ ? 2] ?
?− 1
??
? ← ??
?− 1
end
if ?? ∉,∀? then
CreateDataCloud (?? )
end
forall pair( ??, ??) do
verifyMerge(??, ??)
end
Calculate ??
? // Estimated value as Eq. 11
end
end
end
Algorithm 2: Procedure to create a new DataCloud
procedure CreateDataCloud (?? )
// create new DataCloud j
? ?
?← 1
??
?← 1
[ ? 2] ?
?← 0
?← 1
return
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 13 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 13
Algorithm 3: Procedure to merge DataClouds
procedure verifyMerge (??, ??)
if ???∩ ??
? > ??
?− ???∩ ??
? or ???∩ ??
? > ? ?
?− ???∩ ??
? then
// merge data clouds i and j to data cloud l
calculate ??
? , ??
? ,[ ? 2] ?
? and ?? by Eqs. 8-10
end
return
The coniguration of the parameters is given as follows:
• ? : Size of the previous sample window;
• ?: Aging factor, a positive scalar that is less than or equal to one (usually 0 ≪ ?≤ 1);
• ? : Sensitivity threshold of the method;
• ?: Weight initialization (Table 3).
As input, the model uses the vector of previous samples ( ? ? ), and the output of the model is the predicted
value (??+ 1).
In summary, the article proposes a method that boasts minimal storage requirements, as it necessitates only
four instances for each DataCloud (an integer for the number of samples, a loat for the mean value, a loat for the
variance value, and a vector of loats for the RLS ilter weights). This recursive technique involves the updating of
these variables at each iteration and does not rely on complex mathematical models. In contrast, as demonstrated,
the algorithm possesses a relatively simple algebraic structure, particularly when compared to techniques such as
Deep Learning models ( e.g Convolution Neural Networks). The article codes are stored in a Github repository 2.
5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, the dataset used to evaluate the newly proposed technique will be presented. Then, the TEDA
Regressor will be compared with the traditional Recursive Least Squares (RLS) method and with Convolution
Neural Networks (CNN). The relevance and inluence of the algorithm parameters will be also discussed. Finally,
it will be analyzed the variation of the model parameters and how the results will be afected. The following
results were run on an Intel i5 notebook, 256GB SSD, and 4GB RAM.
5.1 Considered dataset
For the evaluation of the proposed algorithm and proper discussions about its coniguration parameters, a dataset
comprising a vehicle’s data in the form of time series was considered. The fuel consumption measurements
that constitute this dataset were acquired from a single car provided by a volunteer. This dataset presents 7230
samples of the vehicle’s instantaneous consumption in a 2-hour trip, with the summing of all samples being equal
to the total volume of fuel consumed in this trip.
In order to create this dataset, data acquisition was performed using an OBD-II reader, as performed by
recent works in this area [ 4, 52, 73]. Actually, most vehicles already have an OBD-II interface to provide a lot
of information about its operation, which can be freely accessed by a proper reader/scanner hardware. Such
information can not only give important clues for maintenance purposes, but it can also indicate how eiciently
the vehicle’s engine has operated along the time.
Figure 4 depicts variations in fuel consumption over time, as informed by the vehicle through its OBD-II
interface.
2https://github.com/pedrohmeiraa/TEDA-Regressor
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 14 ---

14 • Andrade et al.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
Time (s)
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006Fuel consumption (L)
Fig. 4. Dataset comprising the informed fuel consumption.
Table 4 presents the following statistical data from the considered dataset: maximum, minimum, mean, standard
deviation, and coeicient of variation (or variability). The coeicient of variation (CV) is a standard measure of
dispersion. Unlike other standard measures of dispersion (for example, variance or standard deviation), the CV is
dimensionless: its numerical value does not depend on the units used to measure the variable in question [ 54].
The data presented in this study has measurements with a mean of 0.002 L/s or 2 mL/s. As a result, the mean
squared error is of the order of 10− 8. However, it is worth noting that the algorithm is applicable to any dataset,
regardless of its mean value.
Table 4. Statistical parameters and dataset characteristics.
Characteristics
Sample size 7230
Maximum value 0.006 L
Minimum value 0.000 L
Mean 0.002 L
Standard deviation 0.001 L
Coeicient of variation 50.00 %
After establishing the dataset, it will be determined the form of comparison for the evaluation of the results.
The metric for the comparison adopted in this work will be the mean squared error, corresponding to the expected
value of the squared (quadratic) error or loss. The mean squared error (MSE) is given by Eq. 19:
???( ?,ˆ?) = 1
????????
? ??????? − 1︁
?=0
( ??− ˆ??) 2 (19)
where ˆ? is the predicted value of the i-th sample, and ?? is the corresponding true value, divided by the number
of samples (???????? ).
In addition to the MSE, another metric will be considered to evaluate the performance of the algorithms:
Energy Consumed ( ?? ), given in Watts (W), calculated through the CodeCarbon platform. To assess energy
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 15 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 15
consumption, the CodeCarbon 3 tool was utilized. Code Carbon is a tool that easily integrates into a Python
codebase, it calculates Energy RAM, Energy CPU, Energy Consumed, and the carbon dioxide ( ?? 2) emissions
caused by the cloud or personal computing resources used to run the code. This enabled us to determine the
optimal hyperparameter settings for each model, in terms of Mean Squared Error (MSE), ?? 2 Emission, Energy
RAM, Energy CPU, and Energy Consumed. For models that use Deep Learning, the use of a Graphics Processing
Unit (GPU) is a possibility to make processing more eicient. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) often require
GPU in object detection and classiication applications. Due to their low computational efort, TEDA Regressor
and RLS do not require a GPU. It is worth noting that a GPU was not utilized in this analysis to facilitate the
comparison between the algorithms. The Code Carbon still measures the GPU Energy, however, the GPU was
not used in these model evaluations, equaling 0.
For a unique trade-of evaluation between MSE and Energy Consumed (EC), we have developed a new metric
based on the ?? score, which is a standard statistical measure for evaluating models used in traditional probability
theory [30]. The user-speciied parameter ? controls the importance of the rates in the calculation, based on the
harmonic mean formula [ 36]. When both rates are given equal weight ( ? = 1), the ?1 score becomes a standard
harmonic mean of the two values [ 71]. Therefore, the harmonic mean ( ?? ) considering the mean squared error
(??? ) and the Energy Consumed ( ?? ) is given by:
?? =( 1+ ?2)× ??? × ??
?2× ??? + ?? (20)
The harmonic mean is a type of average measure often used as fusion data [ 80]. For our case, the ?? is a
numerical combination of the two metrics that we are most interested in analyzing for each technique: MSE
and Energy Consumed. Therefore, the lower the values found, the better the performance of the technique. We
considered three values of ? to evaluate the results: 0.5, 1, and 2. For ? = 0. 5, there is a greater weight for the
Consumed Energy metric. For ? = 1, the weights are equal. Finally, ? = 2, the greatest weight is on the MSE
metric.
5.2 Performance Evaluation
To evaluate the proposed technique, the TEDA Regressor algorithm was compared with traditional solutions
found in the literature: the Recursive Least Squares (RLS) algorithm and Convolution Neural Networks (CNN).
The RLS technique was chosen because our proposed algorithm is based on RLS ilters and it is a technique that
can be used online without the need for previous training. The CNN technique was chosen for comparison, as it
has been widely used by other works in the literature, as highlighted in Section 2. It is important to highlight that
the TEDA Regressor and RLS techniques do not need previous training like the CNN model. Thus, to perform a
proper comparison, the dataset explained in the previous subsection was divided into 84% for network training
and 16% for testing. TEDA Regressor and RLS were only applied to the same 16% of test data. Therefore, for the
results of this Subsection, approximately 1200 measurements of fuel consumption were considered.
Another important consideration is that the TEDA Regressor maps the samples according to the typicality
in relation to each of the DataCloud. And for each of them, there is a respective RLS ilter. Therefore, when a
new data stream sample is associated with a DataCloud, the respective ilter is used for the regression. In the
traditional RLS algorithm, on the other hand, there is no such diferentiation of samples, that is, all input samples
are used to update the ilter weights, regardless of the similarity between them.
To compare the three techniques, we used the "Weight and Biases" 4, a machine learning platform to evaluate
the performance of each algorithm according to a set of parameters. We conigured the WandB platform to run
3https://codecarbon.io/
4Weights and Biases (WandB) platform: https://wandb.ai/site
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 16 ---

16 • Andrade et al.
combinations of all predeined parameters (Table 5) and display the respective MSE, as shown in Figures 5-7.
The best parameter setup, i.e., that presented the lowest MSE is shown in Table 6. For comparison between the
techniques, the common parameters for TEDA Regressor and RLS (? - window size and ? - aging factor) presented
the same options. However, as the TEDA Regressor algorithm has more parameters, there was variation in these,
as shown in Table 5. For the CNN models, we vary window size, just like in TEDA Regressor and RLS, and we
vary the activation function (ł reluž and ł linearž) and the optimization function (ł adamž, ł sgdž, and ł rmspropž). In
total, 700 (5× 7× 5× 4) parameter combinations were run for the TEDA Regressor, 35 (5 × 7) combinations for
the RLS, and 30 (5× 2× 3) combinations for the CNN model.
For better visualization of the results, Figure 8 presents the true dataset and the forecast curves of each
implemented technique. The results for the lowest MSE values are presented in Table 7, which also shows the
?? 2 emissions values and the Energy Consumed (EC) which is the sum of the Energy CPU and the Energy
RAM. Table 8 presents the ratios between the results (MSE, ?? 2 emission, and energy consumption) in the tested
algorithms in relation to that proposed in this article. The RLS mean squared error (MSE) was 4.68 times greater
than TEDA Regressor MSE and the CNN MSE was 12.02 times greater than TEDA Regressor. With regard to
energy consumption, the RLS algorithm consumed 0.24 times the energy consumed by the TEDA Regressor in
Energy RAM memory. Meanwhile, the CNN algorithm consumed 1739.46 times more energy than the TEDA
Regressor in Energy RAM memory. RLS presents less computational efort than TEDA Regressor, but TEDA
Regressor presented a smaller error. Furthermore, TEDA Regressor is based on TEDA which is a classiication
algorithm. In future work, we intend to classify outliers and correct them using the same technique, unlike RLS,
which only has the regression scope.
Fig. 5. TEDA Regressor algorithm sweep: hyperparameter tuning to look for the smallest MSE.
Considering the harmonic mean deined in Eq. 20, for the ? values (0.5, 1, and 2), ????? of the TEDA Regressor
was lower than the means of the RLS algorithm and the CNN model, as can be seen in Table 9. When the ? = 2,
there is a greater weight for the Energy Consumed ( ?? ) metric in that RLS performed better. However, even so,
TEDA Regressor presented a lower harmonic mean.
5.3 Analyzing the configuration window parameter
From this subsection on, the entire dataset will be considered for the presentation of results and discussions,
since TEDA Regressor does not need training. The main premises of an algorithm in the context of TinyML
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 17 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 17
Fig. 6. RLS algorithm sweep: hyperparameter tuning to look for the smallest MSE.
Fig. 7. CNN algorithm sweep: hyperparameter tuning to look for the smallest MSE.
applications are low computational efort and limited memory resources. Hence, we chose a reduced-size input
window to save memory space. As previously mentioned, the size of the window will indicate the number of
previous values in the dataset that will be considered. In the performed tests, we chose the window parameter
(? ) values from 2 to 6 previous samples. The resulting mean squared errors are shown in Figure 9.
The best performance for the studied dataset was for ? = 2 since as the value of ? increases, the MSE also
increases. Therefore, we could notice that the considered dataset presents high data dispersion. Our hypothesis is
that the algorithm will perform better with windows longer than 3 for datasets with smaller dispersions (low
CV). This hypothesis will be tested in future works.
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 18 ---

18 • Andrade et al.
Fig. 8. Comparison of true values with values provided by TEDA Regressor, RLS, and CNN algorithms.
Table 5. Parameters sweep: variables and ranges to sweep over.
Parameter TEDA
Regressor RLS CNN
? [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
? [0.000001, 0.1, 0.25,
0.5, 0.75, 0.9, 1]
[0.000001, 0.1, 0.25,
0.5, 0.75, 0.9, 1] -
? [1.5, 1.8, 2, 2.3, 3] - -
? ["relu", "tanh1",
"tanh2", "zero"] - -
??????? - - ["relu", "linear"]
??????? - - ["adam", "sgd",
"rmsprop"]
Number of runs 700 35 30
5.4 The aging factor parameter
The function of the aging factor ( ?) is to modulate the relevance of the most recent samples compared to the
oldest ones. This parameter should be chosen in the range from 0 to 1. However, it is important to note that the
value of ? cannot be exactly equal to 0, as there would be a division by 0 in Eq. 14. Therefore, in the tested values,
the ? tending to 0 will be included instead.
Figure 10 presents the eight values of tested aging factors and the results of the metric. The best performance
of the algorithm was when ? = 0. 9, presenting the lowest mean squared error.
Through Figure 10, it is possible to see that the largest error occurs with ? tending to 0, but it decreases with
an increase of ?. If the aging factor ( ?) equals 1 ( growing memory case ), there is no attenuation of previous data.
For these results, there was no great diference in relation to ? equals 0.9, although for data with more signiicant
lengths, the value of the aging factor will further afect the performance of the algorithm.
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 19 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 19
Table 6. Best parameter setup for each algorithm.
Parameter TEDA
Regressor RLS CNN
? 2 2 2
? 0.9 0.75 -
? 2 - -
? "tanh2" - -
??????? - - "relu"
??????? - - "adam"
MSE 0.29× 10− 7 1.35× 10− 7 3.48× 10− 7
Energy
Consumed (W) 1.76× 10− 6 0.42× 10− 6 3.05× 10− 3
Table 7. Best performance (minor MSE) for each algorithm and the respective memory variables.
Algorithm MSE
?? 2
Emission
(g)
Energy
CPU
Energy
RAM
Energy
Consumed
TEDA Regressor 0.29× 10− 7 7.95× 10− 7 1.58× 10− 6 0.17× 10− 6 1.76× 10− 6
RLS 1.35× 10− 7 1.23× 10− 7 0.38× 10− 6 0.04× 10− 6 0.42× 10− 6
CNN 3.48× 10− 7 1.63× 10− 3 2.75× 10− 3 0.3× 10− 3 3.05× 10− 3
Table 8. Ratio between the error metrics, ?? 2 emissions, and consumed energy, using the TEDA Regressor value as the
baseline.
Algorithm Ratio
MSE
Ratio
?? 2 Emission
Ratio
Energy Consumed
TEDARegressor 1 1 1
RLS 4.68 0.15 0.24
CNN 12.02 2047.46 1739.46
Table 9. Harmonic mean between the MSE and Energy Consumed (EC) metrics considering ? equal to 0.5, 1, and 2.
Algorithm ?0. 5 ?1 ?2
TEDA Regressor 0.36× 10− 7 0.57× 10− 7 1.35× 10− 7
RLS 1.56× 10− 7 2.06× 10− 7 2.99× 10− 7
CNN 4.35× 10− 7 6.95× 10− 7 17.39× 10− 7
5.5 The threshold of sensitivity parameter
The value for the threshold of sensitivity ( ? ) is related to the sensitivity of the TEDA Regressor algorithm. In
fact, this is a parameter chosen by the user which is very important for the developed algorithm, as it works as a
condition threshold to add new samples to the already existing DataClouds. And if the normalized typicality
(??( ??) ) of the sample is greater than the threshold, the sample will not belong to that DataCloud, according to
the inequality in Eq. 2.
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 20 ---

20 • Andrade et al.
2 3 4 5 6
W indow size
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Mean squar ed er r or
1e−7
3.66e -08
2.61e-07
3.71e-07
4.77e-07
5.80e-07
Fig. 9. Comparison of window size ( ? ) for the fuel consumption dataset.
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Aging factor
0
1
2
3
4
5
Mean squar ed er r or
1e−7
4.89e -07
3.68e-07
2.414e-07
1.01e-07
2.65e-08
9.54e-09
4.73e-08
Fig. 10. Comparison of aging factor ( ?) for fuel consumption dataset.
Therefore, the value of the sensitivity threshold (? ) will inluence the creation of DataClouds and, consequently,
the RLS ilters. Table 11 shows the ive chosen values of ? for testing: 1.5, 1.75, 2, 2.25, and 3.
Table 10 presents the data considering an input window with 2 (two) previous samples to predict the next one.
Figures 12 and 14 represent the fuel values at the instant of times ( ?[ ?− 2] and ?[ ?− 1] ) that will be input to the
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 21 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 21
Table 10. Head of the instantaneous fuel consumption dataset (L/s).
?[ ?− 2] (x-axis) ?[ ?− 1] (y-axis) ?[ ?]
0 2.5956× 10− 4 3.5290× 10− 4
2.5956× 10− 4 3.5290× 10− 4 3.6931× 10− 4
3.5290× 10− 4 3.6931× 10− 4 5.6914× 10− 4
RLS ilters for predicting the fuel value at an instant time ( ?[ ?] ). Remember that each DataCloud is represented
by 4 (four) instances: the number of samples, an average of all samples, variance, and the RLS ilter. To further
aid understanding, we have also included the mean of each DataCloud in order to illustrate the distribution of
each one in relation to the time series samples of the instantaneous fuel consumption.
Table 11. MSE and final number of DataClouds for varying values of the threshold ? .
Threshold (? ) 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 3.00
MSE 2.61× 10− 8 2.61× 10− 8 1.90× 10− 8 1.12× 10− 8 0.954× 10− 8
Final number
of DataClouds 8 4 3 2 1
For each value of ? , the MSE and the number of generated DataClouds were calculated. From Table 11 and
Figure 11, it is possible to see that as the threshold increases, the number of DataClouds decreases. In fact, this
number decreases because with an increase in ? in the Chebyshev Inequality, the probability of a sample having
typicality greater than the threshold also decreases. The smallest error found was for ? = 1. 5, when the algorithm
ended up with eight DataClouds.
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0
Thr eshold value
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
Mean squar ed er r or
1e−8
2.61e -08 2.61e-08
1.9e-08
1.12e-08
9.54e-09
Fig. 11. Comparison of threshold sensitivity ( ? ).
Figure 12 shows the creation and merging processes over time, using ? = 1. 5. The inal number of DataClouds
was eight. Moreover, with a low threshold, the algorithm becomes very sensitive.
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 22 ---

22 • Andrade et al.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
Time (s)
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006Fuel consumption (L)
Fuel consumption (L)
#DataCloud
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
#DataCloud
Fig. 12. Creation and Merging of DataClouds with threshold ? = 1. 5.
Figure 13 shows the input data distribution in the I R2 plane, indicating the means of each of the eight resulting
DataClouds at the end of the execution of the TEDA Regressor.
0.000 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005
T ime [t-2] (s)
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
T ime [t-1] (s)
Samples
DataCloud mean
Fig. 13. Distribution of samples over time and indication of DataClouds means, for the threshold ? = 1. 5.
The threshold value of ? = 3 was also considered (Figure 14). In this case, the algorithm was less sensitive to
data variation, and thus there was no creation of new DataClouds: from the beginning of the data to the end, the
algorithm considered all samples as belonging to the same DataCloud, as illustrated in Figure 15.
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 23 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 23
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000
Time (s)
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
0.006Fuel consumption (L)
Fuel consumption (L)
#DataCloud
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.02
1.04
#DataCloud
Fig. 14. Creation and merging of DataClouds with threshold ? = 3.
0.000 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005
T ime [t-2] (s)
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
T ime [t-1] (s)
Samples
DataCloud mean
Fig. 15. Distribution of samples over time and indication of DataClouds means, for the threshold ? = 3.
5.6 Weight initialization parameter
The function for initializing the weights was deined in Eq. 18. The options for the initialization factor are shown
in Table 3 and were applied to the considered dataset. The mean squared error for the range and for each Weight
Initialization type is shown in Figure 16. To calculate the error in this case, we used only the initial data from the
dataset. In the sample of index 117 of the dataset, there was a convergence of all types of Weight initialization, so
we set the study ranges from 0 to 120. In this range, it is possible to see the behavior of each type of initialization
up to the moment it enters into the regime (Figure 17).
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 24 ---

24 • Andrade et al.
0 - zero 1 - relu 2 - tanh1 3 - tanh2
W eight Initialization
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Mean squared error
1e −7
2.61e -07
1.64e-07
2.84e-08
1.17e-08
Fig. 16. Comparison of Weight Initialization ( ?).
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
T ime (seconds)
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
F uel consumption (L)
T rue
zero
relu
tanh1
tanh2
Fig. 17. Initial fuel dataset data for Weight Initialization ( ?) comparison.
Figure 16 presents the results for each type of weight initialization. The smallest error was ??? = 1. 17× 10− 8,
using initialization type 3 (łtanh2ž). With the vector of initial weights equal to zero (type 0 - ł zerož), the value
was ??? = 26. 11× 10− 8, i.e., more than 22 (twenty-two) times greater.
6 CONCLUSIONS
We have presented an unsupervised ML regression algorithm that is responsive to evolution and changes in
concepts, being useful to process data streams while requiring low computational efort and low memory
allocation. These advantages are positive for IoT solutions when the processing devices are conceptually at the
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 25 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 25
łendž of the applications. When there is a device with resource constraints on the edge, such as a microcontroller
running a machine learning algorithm, it is deined as a TinyML application and this is where our work is inserted
into.
The proposed technique, named TEDA Regressor, is a regression algorithm that combines the eccentricity and
typicality of the TEDA algorithm with the unsupervised clustering and classiication of the AutoCloud algorithm.
Speciically, TEDA Regressor creates DataClouds using an unsupervised approach, and for each Cloud, it employs
an adaptive RLS ilter to estimate the next value in the time series data based on previous inputs. This makes
TEDA Regressor an evolving algorithm that adapts to the changing relationships in the data.
Overall, the TEDA Regressor does not need large memory space, as it only stores, for each DataCloud, the
values of the number of samples, average, and variation. Additionally, it is also stored in the RLS ilter which is
given by the weights and will depend on the number of previous samples, a number chosen by the user. Therefore,
it is an eicient solution, performed through recursive calculations, proving useful for IoT applications that rely
on the processing of data streams.
In the AutoCloud technique, there is a procedure for creating and merging DataClouds, which is also used in
the TEDA Regressor. The diference is that with the insertion of the RLS ilter for each DataCloud, the two ilters
in question must also be merged. Two ilter merging approaches were proposed. The irst option considered
the proportion of the number of samples of each DataCloud. In the second approach, the user can choose the
relevance of each DataCloud. Altogether, these are important contributions to this area, opening many research
opportunities.
The proposed algorithm was compared with the RLS algorithm and with Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNN) which presented mean squared errors 4.68 and 12.02 times higher, respectively, than our technique. In
addition to MSE comparisons, energy metrics and computational efort were also evaluated, including through a
harmonic mean correlating Energy Consumed and MSE. In these scenarios, TEDA Regressor performed more
signiicantly than RLS and CNN.
Finally, for the performed evaluation steps, we intended to show the eiciency of the proposed algorithm
over traditional solutions in this area. After execution, we could conclude that the TEDA Regressor is more
eicient than previous approaches, being suitable for TinyML applications. Moreover, for the particular issue
of fuel consumption, the achieved results by the TEDA Regressor when estimating actual consumption were
very close to the reference measurements taken from the vehicle. Therefore, the proposed algorithm presents
itself as an important contribution not only to the development of unsupervised TinyML algorithms but also to
multi-purpose analyses of vehicular data.
In future works, it is expected the proposal of new approaches for ilter merging. Additionally, new tests on
new datasets will be considered, providing new results to be compared. Finally, the implementation of the TEDA
Regressor algorithm in a microcontroller will be performed, allowing the development of a real application for a
whole new set of vehicle-centric experiments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was inanced in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior-Brasil
(CAPES), Finance Code 001, and we thank the Brazilian fostering agency CNPq (National Council for Scientiic
and Technological Development), Process No. 405531/2022-2.
This work was also supported by INEGI-LAETA (FCT project UIDB/50022/2020).
REFERENCES
[1] Adam Ibrahim Abdi, Fathy Elbouraey Eassa, Kamal Jambi, Khalid Almarhabi, and Abdullah Saad AL-Malaise AL-Ghamdi. 2020.
Blockchain Platforms and Access Control Classiication for IoT Systems. Symmetry 12, 10 (2020). https://doi.org/10.3390/sym12101663
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 26 ---

26 • Andrade et al.
[2] T.S. Ajani, A.L. Imoize, and A.A. Atayero. 2021. An overview of machine learning within embedded and mobile devices-optimizations
and applications. Sensors 21, 13 (2021). https://doi.org/10.3390/s21134412
[3] Shadi Al-Sarawi, Mohammed Anbar, Rosni Abdullah, and Ahmad B. Al Hawari. 2020. Internet of Things Market Analysis Forecasts,
2020ś2030. In 2020 Fourth World Conference on Smart Trends in Systems, Security and Sustainability (WorldS4) . 449ś453. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/WorldS450073.2020.9210375
[4] Pedro Andrade, Ivanovitch Silva, Gabriel Signoretti, Marianne Silva, João Dias, Lucas Marques, and Daniel G. Costa. 2021. An
Unsupervised TinyML Approach Applied for Pavement Anomalies Detection Under the Internet of Intelligent Vehicles. In 2021 IEEE
International Workshop on Metrology for Industry 4.0 IoT (MetroInd4.0 IoT) . 642ś647. https://doi.org/10.1109/MetroInd4.0IoT51437.2021.
9488546
[5] Plamen Angelov. 2014. Anomaly detection based on eccentricity analysis. 1ś8. https://doi.org/10.1109/EALS.2014.7009497
[6]
Plamen Parvanov Angelov and Xiaowei Gu. 2019. Empirical Approach to Machine Learning . Springer International Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02384-3
[7] Giorgos Armeniakos, Georgios Zervakis, Dimitrios Soudris, and Jörg Henkel. 2022. Hardware Approximate Techniques for Deep Neural
Network Accelerators: A Survey. Comput. Surveys 55, 4 (nov 2022), 1ś36. https://doi.org/10.1145/3527156
[8] Giorgos Armeniakos, Georgios Zervakis, Dimitrios Soudris, Mehdi B. Tahoori, and Jörg Henkel. 2022. Cross-Layer Approximation for
Printed Machine Learning Circuits. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference Exhibition on Design, Automation & Test in Europe (Antwerp,
Belgium) (DATE ’22). European Design and Automation Association, Leuven, BEL, 190ś195.
[9] Mohammad Farhadi Bajestani, Mehdi Ghasemi, Sarma Vrudhula, and Yezhou Yang. 2020. Enabling Incremental Knowledge Transfer for
Object Detection at the Edge. arXiv:2004.05746 [cs.CV]
[10] Colby Banbury, Chuteng Zhou, Igor Fedorov, Ramon Matas Navarro, Urmish Thakker, Dibakar Gope, Vijay Janapa Reddi, Matthew
Mattina, and Paul N. Whatmough. 2021. MicroNets: Neural Network Architectures for Deploying TinyML Applications on Commodity
Microcontrollers. arXiv:2010.11267 [cs.LG]
[11] A. Bernieri, G. Betta, and C. Liguori. 1996. On-line fault detection and diagnosis obtained by implementing neural algorithms on a
digital signal processor. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement 45, 5 (1996), 894ś899. https://doi.org/10.1109/19.536707
[12] Clauber Bezerra, Bruno Costa, Luiz Afonso Guedes, and Plamen Angelov. 2020. An Evolving Approach to Data Streams Clustering
Based on Typicality and Eccentricity Data Analytics. Information Sciences 518 (05 2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2019.12.022
[13] Clauber Gomes Bezerra, Bruno Sielly Jales Costa, Luiz Afonso Guedes, and Plamen Parvanov Angelov. 2016. An evolving approach
to unsupervised and Real-Time fault detection in industrial processes. Expert Systems with Applications 63 (2016), 134 ś 144. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2016.06.035
[14] Vincenzo Bianco, Oronzio Manca, and Sergio Nardini. 2009. Electricity consumption forecasting in Italy using linear regression models.
Energy 34 (07 2009), 1413ś1421. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2009.06.034
[15] Peter Blouw, Gurshaant Malik, Benjamin Morcos, Aaron Voelker, and Chris Eliasmith. 2021. Hardware Aware Training for Eicient
Keyword Spotting on General Purpose and Specialized Hardware. In Research Symposium on Tiny Machine Learning .
[16] R.A. Campêlo, M.A. Casanova, D.O. Guedes, and A.H.F. Laender. 2020. A brief survey on replica consistency in cloud environments.
Journal of Internet Services and Applications 11, 1 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13174-020-0122-y cited By 0.
[17] Kun Cao, Shiyan Hu, Yang Shi, Armando Walter Colombo, Stamatis Karnouskos, and Xin Li. 2021. A Survey on Edge and Edge-
Cloud Computing Assisted Cyber-Physical Systems. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 17, 11 (2021), 7806ś7819. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TII.2021.3073066
[18] G. Cerutti, R. Prasad, A. Brutti, and E. Farella. 2020. Compact recurrent neural networks for acoustic event detection on low-energy
low-complexity platforms. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing (2020), 1ś1. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTSP.2020.2969775
[19] P. Chebyshev. 1867. Des valeurs moyennes. Liouville’s J. Math. Pures Appl. 12 (1867), 177ś184.
[20] Anjir Ahmed Chowdhury, Md Abir Hossen, Md Ali Azam, and Md Haizur Rahman. 2022. DeepQGHO: Quantized Greedy Hyperparameter
Optimization in Deep Neural Networks for on-the-Fly Learning. IEEE Access 10 (2022), 6407ś6416. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.
2022.3141781
[21] M. Compare, P. Baraldi, I. Bani, E. Zio, and D. McDonnell. 2020. Industrial equipment reliability estimation: A Bayesian Weibull regression
model with covariate selection. Reliability Engineering and System Safety 200 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2020.106891
[22] Daniel G. Costa. 2020. Visual Sensors Hardware Platforms: A Review. IEEE Sensors Journal 20, 8 (2020), 4025ś4033. https://doi.org/10.
1109/JSEN.2019.2952447
[23] Daniel G. Costa and Felipe P. de Oliveira. 2020. A prioritization approach for optimization of multiple concurrent sensing applications
in smart cities. Future Generation Computer Systems 108 (2020), 228ś243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2020.02.067
[24] Giulia Crocioni, Danilo Pau, Jean-Michel Delorme, and Giambattista Gruosso. 2020. Li-Ion Batteries Parameter Estimation With Tiny
Neural Networks Embedded on Intelligent IoT Microcontrollers. IEEE Access 8 (2020), 122135ś122146. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.
2020.3007046
[25] Simone Disabato and Manuel Roveri. 2020. Incremental On-Device Tiny Machine Learning. 7ś13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3417313.3429378
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 27 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 27
[26] H. Doyu, R. Morabito, and M. Brachmann. 2021. A TinyMLaaS Ecosystem for Machine Learning in IoT: Overview and Research Challenges.
2021 International Symposium on VLSI Design, Automation and Test, VLSI-DAT 2021 - Proceedings (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/VLSI-
DAT52063.2021.9427352
[27] Lachit Dutta and Swapna Bharali. 2021. TinyML Meets IoT: A Comprehensive Survey. Internet of Things 16 (2021), 100461. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2021.100461
[28] Bahar Farahani, Mojtaba Barzegari, Fereidoon Shams Aliee, and Khaja Ahmad Shaik. 2020. Towards collaborative intelligent IoT eHealth:
From device to fog, and cloud. Microprocessors and Microsystems 72 (2020), 102938. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpro.2019.102938
[29] Igor Fedorov, Ryan P Adams, Matthew Mattina, and Paul Whatmough. 2019. Sparse: Sparse architecture search for cnns on resource-
constrained microcontrollers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 4978ś4990.
[30] Wirth F. Ferger. 1931. The Nature and Use of the Harmonic Mean. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. 26, 173 (1931), 36ś40. http://www.jstor.org/
stable/2278257
[31] Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. 2010. Understanding the diiculty of training deep feedforward neural networks. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth International Conference on Artiicial Intelligence and Statistics (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 9) , Yee Whye
Teh and Mike Titterington (Eds.). PMLR, Chia Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy, 249ś256. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v9/glorot10a.html
[32] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. 2016. Deep Learning. MIT Press. http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[33] X. Gu, P. P. Angelov, A. M. Ali, W. A. Gruver, and G. Gaydadjiev. 2016. Online evolving fuzzy rule-based prediction model for high
frequency trading inancial data stream. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Evolving and Adaptive Intelligent Systems (EAIS) . 169ś175.
[34] Hui Han and Julien Siebert. 2022. TinyML: A Systematic Review and Synthesis of Existing Research. In 2022 International Conference on
Artiicial Intelligence in Information and Communication (ICAIIC) . 269ś274. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICAIIC54071.2022.9722636
[35] Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William J. Dally. 2016. Deep Compression: Compressing Deep Neural Networks with Pruning, Trained
Quantization and Hufman Coding. arXiv:1510.00149 [cs.CV]
[36] David Hand and Peter Christen. 2018. A Note on Using the F-Measure for Evaluating Record Linkage Algorithms. Statistics and
Computing 28, 3 (may 2018), 539ś547. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11222-017-9746-6
[37] Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. 2009. The Elements of Statistical Learning . Springer New York. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7
[38] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2015. Delving Deep into Rectiiers: Surpassing Human-Level Performance on
ImageNet Classiication. IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV 2015) 1502 (02 2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.
2015.123
[39] Cheng-Fu Huang, Ding-Hsiang Huang, and Yi-Kuei Lin. 2020. Network reliability evaluation for a distributed network with edge
computing. Computers & Industrial Engineering 147 (2020), 106492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2020.106492
[40] Vijay Janapa Reddi, Brian Plancher, Susan Kennedy, Laurence Moroney, Pete Warden, Lara Suzuki, Anant Agarwal, Colby Banbury,
Massimo Banzi, Matthew Bennett, Benjamin Brown, Sharad Chitlangia, Radhika Ghosal, Sarah Grafman, Rupert Jaeger, Srivatsan
Krishnan, Maximilian Lam, Daniel Leiker, Cara Mann, Mark Mazumder, Dominic Pajak, Dhilan Ramaprasad, J. Evan Smith, Matthew
Stewart, and Dustin Tingley. 2022. Widening Access to Applied Machine Learning With TinyML. https://doi.org/10.1162/99608f92.
762d171a https://hdsr.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/0gbwdele.
[41] Raj Kamal, Aabha Jain, and Manojkumar Vilasrao Deshpande. 2022. Architectural Design for Inspection of Machine Objects Using
Small DNNs as TinyML for Machine Vision of Defects and Faults in the Manufacturing Processes. In Smart Systems: Innovations in
Computing, Arun K. Somani, Ankit Mundra, Robin Doss, and Subhajit Bhattacharya (Eds.). Springer Singapore, Singapore, 377ś387.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-2877-1_34
[42] Dmitry Kangin and Plamen Parvanov Angelov. 2015. Evolving clustering, classiication and regression with TEDA. In Proceedings of the
2015 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) . IEEE, 1ś8. https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN.2015.7280528
[43] Dmitry Kangin, Plamen Angelov, and José Antonio Iglesias. 2016. Autonomously evolving classiier TEDAClass. Information Sciences
366 (2016), 1 ś 11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2016.05.012
[44] Aditya Kusupati, Manish Singh, Kush Bhatia, Ashish Kumar, Prateek Jain, and Manik Varma. 2018. FastGRNN: A Fast, Accurate, Stable
and Tiny Kilobyte Sized Gated Recurrent Neural Network. In NeurIPS. 9031ś9042.
[45] Dawei Li, Serafettin Tasci, Shalini Ghosh, Jingwen Zhu, Junting Zhang, and Larry Heck. 2019. RILOD: Near Real-Time Incremental
Learning for Object Detection at the Edge. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing (Arlington, Virginia) (SEC
’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 113ś126. https://doi.org/10.1145/3318216.3363317
[46] Ji Lin, Wei-Ming Chen, Yujun Lin, J. Cohn, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. 2020. MCUNet: Tiny Deep Learning on IoT Devices. ArXiv
abs/2007.10319 (2020).
[47] S. Maitra, D. Richards, A. Abdelgawad, and K. Yelamarthi. 2019. Performance Evaluation of IoT Encryption Algorithms: Memory, Timing,
and Energy. In 2019 IEEE Sensors Applications Symposium (SAS) . 1ś6. https://doi.org/10.1109/SAS.2019.8706017
[48] Puranjay Mohan, Aditya Jyoti Paul, and Abhay Chirania. 2021. A Tiny CNN Architecture for Medical Face Mask Detection for Resource-
Constrained Endpoints. Innovations in Electrical and Electronic Engineering(2021), 657ś670. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-0749-3_52
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 28 ---

28 • Andrade et al.
[49]
Muhammad Husnain Mubarik, Dennis D. Weller, Nathaniel Bleier, Matthew Tomei, Jasmin Aghassi-Hagmann, Mehdi B. Tahoori, and
Rakesh Kumar. 2020. Printed Machine Learning Classiiers. In 2020 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO). 73ś87. https://doi.org/10.1109/MICRO50266.2020.00019
[50] Pierre-Emmanuel Novac, Andrea Castagnetti, Adrien Russo, Benoît Miramond, Alain Pegatoquet, Francois Verdier, and Andrea
Castagnetti. 2020. Toward unsupervised Human Activity Recognition on Microcontroller Units. In 2020 23rd Euromicro Conference on
Digital System Design (DSD) . 542ś550. https://doi.org/10.1109/DSD51259.2020.00090
[51] Maria T. Nyamukuru and Koi M. Odame. 2020. Tiny Eats: Eating Detection on a Microcontroller. In 2020 IEEE Second Workshop on
Machine Learning on Edge in Sensor Systems (SenSys-ML) . 19ś23. https://doi.org/10.1109/SenSysML50931.2020.00011
[52] Julio Oliveira, Jeferson Lemos, Elton Vieira, Ivanovitch Silva, Joilson Abrantes, Danilo Barros, and Daniel Costa. 2017. CO2 Catcher: A
Platform for Monitoring of Vehicular Pollution in Smart Cities. 37ś42. https://doi.org/10.1109/S3C.2017.8501380
[53] Anas Osman, Usman Abid, Luca Gemma, Matteo Perotto, and Davide Brunelli. 2022. TinyML Platforms Benchmarking. In International
Conference on Applications in Electronics Pervading Industry, Environment and Society . Springer, 139ś148.
[54] Raydonal Ospina and Fernando Marmolejo-Ramos. 2019. Performance of Some Estimators of Relative Variability. Frontiers in Applied
Mathematics and Statistics 5 (2019), 43. https://doi.org/10.3389/fams.2019.00043
[55] Marco Pasetti, Paolo Ferrari, Diego Rodrigo Cabral Silva, Ivanovitch Silva, and Emiliano Sisinni. 2020. On the Use of LoRaW AN for the
Monitoring and Control of Distributed Energy Resources in a Smart Campus. Applied Sciences 10, 1 (2020). https://doi.org/10.3390/
app10010320
[56] G. Premsankar, M. Di Francesco, and T. Taleb. 2018. Edge Computing for the Internet of Things: A Case Study. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 5, 2 (April 2018), 1275ś1284. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2805263
[57] Leonardo Ravaglia, Manuele Rusci, Davide Nadalini, Alessandro Capotondi, Francesco Conti, and Luca Benini. 2021. A TinyML Platform
for On-Device Continual Learning With Quantized Latent Replays. IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems
11, 4 (2021), 789ś802. https://doi.org/10.1109/JETCAS.2021.3121554
[58] Partha Pratim Ray. 2021. A review on TinyML: State-of-the-art and prospects. Journal of King Saud University - Computer and Information
Sciences (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2021.11.019
[59] Haoyu Ren, Darko Anicic, and Thomas Runkler. 2021. TinyOL: TinyML with Online-Learning on Microcontrollers.
arXiv:2103.08295 [cs.LG]
[60] Dimitrios Rimpas, Andreas Papadakis, and Maria Samarakou. 2020. OBD-II sensor diagnostics for monitoring vehicle operation and
consumption. Energy Reports 6 (2020), 55ś63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2019.10.018 Technologies and Materials for Renewable
Energy, Environment and Sustainability.
[61] A. Sabbioni, V. Beretti, P. Superchi, and M. Ablondi. 2020. Body weight estimation from body measures in Cornigliese sheep breed.
Italian Journal of Animal Science 19, 1 (2020), 25ś30. https://doi.org/10.1080/1828051X.2019.1689189
[62] R. Sanchez-Iborra. 2021. Lpwan and embedded machine learning as enablers for the next generation of wearable devices. Sensors 21, 15
(2021). https://doi.org/10.3390/s21155218
[63] R. Sanchez-Iborra and A.F. Skarmeta. 2020. TinyML-Enabled Frugal Smart Objects: Challenges and Opportunities. IEEE Circuits and
Systems Magazine 20, 3 (2020), 4ś18. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCAS.2020.3005467 cited By 16.
[64] Nicholas I. Sapankevych and Ravi Sankar. 2009. Time Series Prediction Using Support Vector Machines: A Survey. IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine 4, 2 (2009), 24ś38. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCI.2009.932254
[65] Nicholas I. Sapankevych and Ravi Sankar. 2009. Time Series Prediction Using Support Vector Machines: A Survey. IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine 4, 2 (2009), 24ś38. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCI.2009.932254
[66] M.G. Sarwar Murshed, C. Murphy, D. Hou, N. Khan, G. Ananthanarayanan, and F. Hussain. 2022. Machine Learning at the Network
Edge: A Survey. Comput. Surveys 54, 8 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1145/3469029
[67] Ali H. Sayed and Thomas Kailath. 2000. Recursive Least-Squares Adaptive Filters. In The Digital Signal Processing Handbook . CRC Press,
Chapter 21.
[68] Zach Shelby, Jan Jongboom, and Kartik Thakore. 2020. Cough Detection with TinyML on Arduino . https://create.arduino.cc/projecthub/
edge-impulse/cough-detection-with-tinyml-on-arduino-417f37
[69] Weisong Shi, Jie Cao, Quan Zhang, Youhuizi Li, and Lanyu Xu. 2016. Edge Computing: Vision and Challenges. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 3, 5 (2016), 637ś646. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2016.2579198
[70] Weisong Shi, Jie Cao, Quan Zhang, Youhuizi Li, and Lanyu Xu. 2016. Edge Computing: Vision and Challenges. IEEE Internet of Things
Journal 3, 5 (2016), 637ś646. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2016.2579198
[71] Gabriel Signoretti, Marianne Silva, Pedro Andrade, Ivanovitch Silva, Emiliano Sisinni, and Paolo Ferrari. 2021. An Evolving TinyML
Compression Algorithm for IoT Environments Based on Data Eccentricity. Sensors 21, 12 (2021). https://doi.org/10.3390/s21124153
[72] Gabriel Signoretti, Marianne Silva, Alexandre Dias, Ivanovitch Silva, Diego Silva, and Paolo Ferrari. 2019. Performance Evaluation
of an Edge OBD-II Device for Industry 4.0. In 2019 II Workshop on Metrology for Industry 4.0 and IoT (MetroInd4.0 IoT) . 432ś437.
https://doi.org/10.1109/METROI4.2019.8792885
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.

--- Page 29 ---

Online Processing of Vehicular Data on the Edge Through an Unsupervised TinyML Regression Technique • 29
[73] Marianne Silva, Gabriel Signoretti, Julio Oliveira, Ivanovitch Silva, and Daniel Costa. 2019. A Crowdsensing Platform for Monitoring of
Vehicular Emissions: A Smart City Perspective. Future Internet 11 (01 2019), 13. https://doi.org/10.3390/i11010013
[74] Benjamin Sliwa, Nico Piatkowski, and Christian Wietfeld. 2020. LIMITS: Lightweight Machine Learning for IoT Systems with Resource
Limitations. In ICC 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC) . 1ś7. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICC40277.2020.
9149180
[75] Eduardo Soares, Pyramo Pires da Costa Júnior Costa Jr, Bruno Costa, and Daniel Leite. 2018. Ensemble of Evolving Data Clouds and
Fuzzy Models for Weather Time Series Prediction. Applied Soft Computing 64 (01 2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2017.12.032
[76] H.Y. Teh, A.W. Kempa-Liehr, and K.I.-K. Wang. 2020. Sensor data quality: a systematic review. Journal of Big Data 7, 1 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-020-0285-1
[77] Xiaying Wang, Michele Magno, Lukas Cavigelli, and Luca Benini. 2019. FANN-on-MCU: An Open-Source Toolkit for Energy-Eicient
Neural Network Inference at the Edge of the Internet of Things. arXiv:1911.03314 [cs.LG]
[78] Xiaying Wang, Michele Magno, Lukas Cavigelli, and Luca Benini. 2020. FANN-on-MCU: An Open-Source Toolkit for Energy-Eicient
Neural Network Inference at the Edge of the Internet of Things. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 7, 5 (2020), 4403ś4417. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.2976702
[79] P. Warden and D. Situnayake. 2020. TinyML: Machine Learning with TensorFlow Lite on Arduino and Ultra-low-power Microcontrollers .
O’Reilly.
[80] Zeshui Xu. 2009. Fuzzy Harmonic Mean Operators. Int. J. Intell. Syst. 24 (02 2009), 152ś172. https://doi.org/10.1002/int.20330
[81] Jing Zhang and Dacheng Tao. 2021. Empowering Things With Intelligence: A Survey of the Progress, Challenges, and Opportunities in
Artiicial Intelligence of Things. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 8, 10 (2021), 7789ś7817. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.3039359
ACM Trans. Embedd. Comput. Syst.