--- Page 1 ---

An Ontological Knowledge Representation
for Smart Agriculture
Bikram Pratim Bhuyan∗, Ravi Tomar†, Maanak Gupta‡, and Amar Ramdane-Cherif§
∗†Dept. of Informatics, School of Computer Science,
University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun, India
‡Dept. of Computer Science, Tennessee Technological University, Cookeville, Tennessee 38505, USA
§LISV Laboratory, University of Versailles Versailles, France
∗bikram23bhuyan@gmail.com,†ravitomar7@gmail.com,‡mgupta@tntech.edu§amar.ramdane-cherif@uvsq.fr
Abstract—In order to provide the agricultural industry with
the infrastructure it needs to take advantage of advanced technol-
ogy, such as big data, the cloud, and the internet of things (IoT);
smart farming is a management concept that focuses on pro-
viding the infrastructure necessary to track, monitor, automate,
and analyse operations. To represent the knowledge extracted
from the primary data collected is of utmost importance. An
agricultural ontology framework for smart agriculture systems
is presented in this study. The knowledge graph is represented
as a lattice to capture and perform reasoning on spatio-temporal
agricultural data.
Index Terms —smart agriculture, smart farming, knowledge
representation, ontology, lattice structure, precision agriculture
I. I NTRODUCTION
People all across the globe depend on agriculture for their
daily sustenance. Crop yields are decreasing, which drives
up food costs [2]. Additionally, as the ordinary person be-
comes wealthier, their eating habits are changing and they
are consuming more food, including more meat. Land, water,
energy, and other resources are becoming more scarce, making
it difﬁcult to meet the world’s growing need for food. Water
contamination, poor soil fertility, fertiliser misuse, climate
change, or illnesses may push a country’s population below
the poverty line. Internet of things (IOT) in conjunction with
wireless sensor networks (WSN) is seen as the possible answer
for making effective interventions in agriculture. Agriculture
is being revolutionised by the usage of IoT, a combination of
developing technologies that gives farmers the tools they need
to meet the immense problems of the twenty-ﬁrst century.
Precision agriculture (PA), commonly referred to as site-
speciﬁc farming, is a kind of agricultural management that
relies heavily on information.
Several works [26]–[30] have developed to emphasize the
need for smart agriculture systems along with associated
cybersecutity concerns. Throughout human history, signiﬁcant
advancements have been developed to increase agricultural
productivity while using less resources and work hours. De-
spite this, the high population rate has always prevented supply
and demand from matching. According to projections, the
global population will reach 9.8 billion people in 2050, up
by almost 25% from today’s level [3]. Crop production is
essential not just for food, but also for industry; in fact, crops
like cotton, rubber, and gum are key to the economy of many
countries. In addition, the food-crops-based bioenergy sector
has lately begun to grow in size. In-depth research revealed
that each agricultural ﬁeld has unique features that may be
assessed independently in terms of both quality and quantity.
Soil type, nutrient present, irrigation ﬂow, insect resistance,
and other critical elements establish a crop’s appropriateness
and capacity. Even though the same crop is being planted over
the whole farm, differences in features might occur within a
single ﬁeld in most cases, necessitating site-speciﬁc analysis
in order to provide the best possible yield [4].
Various methodologies and architectures are being proposed
by scientists and engineers all over the world based on which
a wide range of equipment is being suggested to monitor and
retrieve information on crop status at various stages, taking a
diversity of crop and ﬁeld kinds into consideration. The market
need is driving several prominent manufacturers to provide
sensors, unmanned aerial vehicles (UA V) and other heavy gear
to transport data collected by the robots [5]. In this paper,
we formally formulate the representation of the data collected
in a lattice structure and build a mining algorithm for rule
generation.
II. L ITERATURE SURVEY
Multitude of work over the use of IOT in agriculture can be
found in literature. The chapter [6] gives an overview of IoT
applications, including where they are now and where they are
going in the future. Speciﬁc IoT-based PA applications, includ-
ing as precision irrigation, fertilisation, agricultural disease
management, and pest control, are discussed in detail in the
various parts of the book. Articles in signiﬁcant journals were
reviewed in [7], current research trends were analysed, and
common IoT sensors and devices were investigated. Agricul-
ture APPs, advantages and problems in IoT-based agricultural
production were also investigated. Accordingly, the paper
stated that smart agriculture’s future developments include
building a generic platform for all kinds of crops and animals,
QoS (Quality of Service), and using explainable artiﬁcial
intelligence to monitor crop growth and disease prevention.
Experiment was conducted on agricultural equipment vibra-
tion and tilt using ﬁve different machine learning algorithms
in [8] (K-Nearest Neighbor; Support Vector Machine; Decision
Tree; Random Forest; and Gradient Boosting). The results
arXiv:2112.12768v1 [cs.AI] 21 Dec 2021

--- Page 2 ---

from Random Forest were the most precise. Over-ﬁtting was
seen in the Gradient boosting and Random Forest algorithms;
yet, they both generated the greatest testing accuracies.
When it comes to precision agriculture, there are a number
of different ontologies to consider. AGROVOC [9] is the most
often used ontology. Because of its inconsistently assigned
connections and too wide deﬁnitions, AGROVOC is simply
a decent vocabulary system to begin creating an agricultural
ontology, not an ontology for agriculture itself. AgriOnt is
a framework for smart agriculture presented by the authors
in [1]. Agri-based ontology is divided into four parts: geo-
graphical ontology, the business domain, the IoT domain, and
an agricultural domain. A framework was presented, however
it is constrained by context awareness, scalability, and service-
oriented design. This is a challenge.
The researchers in [10] came up with SAAONT, which is
targeted towards Saudi Arabian farmers. Earlier ontologies
couldn’t provide farmers with the information they needed.
SAAONT’s structure implementation uses many steps of the
ontology creation process, including ontology selection, re-
use, modelling, and interaction design. Because the Arabic
language is not widely recognised by farmers throughout the
globe, this ontology is restricted to the Arabic area alone.
Authors solely targeted Saudi Arabia and built an ontology
for the Arabic region.
Site-speciﬁc characteristics were linked to crop-speciﬁc
trait ontologies in [11] to sensor measurement data. Main
characteristic of the technique is data integration enabling
syntactic and semantic compatibility. Use of APIs and web
services in the agricultural area for syntactic interoperability of
gadget information is an important aspect of the investigation.
An ontology model was used by the authors in [12] to create
a recommendation system for describing insect outbreaks in
crops and the acceptable methods of treating and facilitating
them. Researchers in this study also examine pests, crops,
and the disease triangle’s treatment ontologies (PCT-O). As
an example, the ontology of knowledge about longan fruit
farming and production was constructed by the authors in [13]
and used using a semantic search approach in order to improve
fruit quality and cultivate quality longan fruit ﬁt for the
worldwide market.
Crop cultivation standard (CCS) and task ontology and
domain ontology are used by the authors [14] to express a
technique. Static information pertaining to domain ontologies,
such seeds, soils, and agricultural machinery, makes up the
bulk of the data. For example, soil and seed selection, irriga-
tion and fertilisation are all part of the task ontology. Climate
change ontologies were studied in [15].
SAGRO-Lite, a lightweight ontology built by the authors
in [16] for unique agricultural features in poor nations, has
been used by the authors to construct a semantically enhanced
agent-based model dubbed Agent Based Semantic Model
for Smart Agriculture, ABSMSA. For semantic sensing and
event detection and processing, the system makes use of
two additional ontologies: IoT-Lite and the Complex Event
Service Ontology (CESO). A rapid uptake of IoT in farming
is not feasible in low- and middle-income countries due to
literacy issues, apprehension about new technology, a lack of
available land, and the high cost of IoT agricultural solutions.
Lightweight Internet of Things (IoT) tailored to developing
country agricultural practises, such as in India, may improve
farmers’ productivity and yield.
Using Boosted Continuous Non-spatial whole-attribute Ex-
traction, the authors in [17] proposed an ontology enabled
IoT for distinguishing healthy separation of sekai-ichi apples.
The Post-Harvest procedure wastes a signiﬁcant amount of
Sekai-ichi apple due to its propensity to spread disease. It’s
particularly risky to lose the sekai-ichi apple count since
it doesn’t spoil quickly after harvest. It was suggested that
a post-harvest hierarchical model be used to specify post-
harvest losses prevention and deﬁciencies to precisely and
quickly identify waste in order to maintain a healthy separation
of agriculture from the surrounding environment. There are
three levels of processing schemes used in these recommenda-
tions, with the separation cognitive operation taking the three
schemes from lowest to highest.
A few scholars worked on ontologies, while others con-
structed recommendation systems, provided case studies, and
created models and frameworks in the previously stated linked
work. The major issues of this studies are service-oriented,
scalable, and aware of the context. The depiction of temporal
and spatial data remains a challenge as well. Taking these
pitfalls in the previous works into consideration, we tend to
present a spatio-temporal ontological structure for knowlwdge
representation. The spatio-temporal data collected from the
IoT devices are processed to form a lattice structure which is
farther used to generate rules based on the lattice properties.
Formal deﬁnition for the knowledge representation of such
spatio-temporal agricultural data is carried out in the next
section.
III. K NOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION AND REASONING
For automated reasoning, knowledge representation [18] in
artiﬁcial intelligent (AI) refers to the process of creating a clear
symbolic notation that expresses an intelligent agent’s beliefs,
intents, and values. From a strictly computational perspective,
the primary goals to be fulﬁlled are scope, expressivity,
accuracy, support for efﬁcient inference, learnability, resilience
and simplicity of development. A wide range of computing
problems, including text interpretation and cognitive robots,
have beneﬁted from knowledge-based strategies [19]. While
suitable knowledge representations are important for software
design and performance, our choice of knowledge representa-
tion systems also exposes our implicit ideas about the nature of
machine and human intelligence. If rule-based representations
and semantic networks have different ideas on how knowledge
is structured in human brains, then it’s possible that the two
camps will disagree [20].
To represent knowledge, a variety of generic designs have
been utilised, including ﬁrst-order logic, formal logics, seman-
tic networks, and frame-based systems [21]. In constructing

--- Page 3 ---

representations for many domains, the difﬁculty of repre-
senting temporal information is an example of the types of
difﬁculties that might occur [31]. Knowledge management
representation languages should be simple to use, even for
non-specialists, and promote human communication, which is
frequently facilitated by the ability to express still-unreﬁned
concepts, reduce complexity, omit speciﬁcs, and host several
points of view all at once. All of these qualities may be found
in graphic representation languages, which are commonly
employed to enable information ﬂow.
We now work with some basic deﬁnitions for the formal
knowledge representation.
IV. B ASIC DEFINITIONS
As data collected from the devices are spatio-temporal in
nature, we have we work with data cubes or in other sense
‘panel data’.
A. Panel Data
When talking about longitudinal data, it’s common to use
the term ‘panel data’ [22], which refers to a collection of
observations from several time periods. Panel data, like time
series data, is made up of observations that are gathered on
a regular basis and organised chronologically. Observations
on a large group of people are found in panel data, much
as in cross-sectional data. It’s a special area of time series
modelling to model these panel data series since they have a
distinctive structure [24]. There are two main types of panel
data methods [23]: a) This model assumes that all people have
the same set of model parameters, which is known as the
homogeneous assumption. b) Heterogeneous models, on the
other hand, allow for individual differences in any or all of the
model parameters. Heterogeneous panel data models include
models with ﬁxed effects and random effects.
B. F ormal Interpretation
Each location of the devices to collect data is represented
as a set L = {L1,L 2,...,L n} where ‘n’ is the total
number of distinct location called as ‘agro-location’. The
constantly collected information or data which is denoted
by J = {J1,J 2,...,J k} where ‘k’ is the total distinct
properties or dimensions captured by the smart device. As
data is collected across various timestamps, it is denoted by
T = {T1,T 2,...,T t} where ‘t’ is the number of instances the
data is collected. Table I gives a reference to the symbols used
in this article.
We are now set to deﬁne a projection function to map
locations to their respective property in the timestamp.
Deﬁnition 1. A projection function P is deﬁned from the
agro location to the properties with a timestamp as:
P :L ↦→J ×T (1)
The projection function operates amongst the two sets as a bi-
nary operator to capture the presence of a certain dimension or
property at that particular time for the agro-location (denoted
by ‘c’).
TABLE I
NOTATIONS USED IN THE ARTICLE
Hieroglyph Interpretation
L Set of distinct agro-locations
J Set of distinct dimensions
T Set of distinct timestamps
P Projection function
l⊘ Friendly function on a set l⊆L
j⊘ Friendly function on a set j⊆J
t⊘ Friendly function on a set t⊆T
∂(L,J,T ) Spatio-temporal lattice structure
(L,J,T,P ) Spatio-temporal structure
(l,j,t ) Agro-triple
∨ Lattice suprema
∧ Lattice inﬁma
φ Support count
µ Conﬁdence
∆ Set of associative rules
A slice of the data-cube is shown in Table II, where for
instance Ln possess the dimension set {J1,J 2,J k} for a
distinct time-stamp. Similar slice is shown in Table III where
for example, the presence of the dimension J2 is seen across
the timestamp set {T1,T t} for the same agro-location.
TABLE II
PROJECTION FROM AGRO -LOCATION TO DIMENSIONS
Agro-Location J1 J2 ... Jk
L1 c c
L2 c c
L3 c c
L4 c c
... c
Ln c c c
TABLE III
PROJECTION FROM TIMESTAMP TO DIMENSIONS
Timestamp J1 J2 ... Jk
T1 c c
T2 c
T3 c
T4 c
... c c
Tt c c
Deﬁnition 2. A friendly function l⊘ on a set l ⊆ L is
deﬁned as:
l⊘ = (j,t ) ∈ {(J ×T )|(l,m,t ) ∈P, ∀l ∈L} (2)
where j ⊆J and t ⊆T .
Thus, this friendly operator on a subset of the agro-location
captures the tuples in both space and time where the common
dimensions with the respective timestamp for that set of
location is collected and stored. Similar friendly functions can
be created for the dimensions and timestamp as follows.
Deﬁnition 3. A friendly function j⊘ on a set j ⊆ J is
deﬁned as:
j⊘ = (l,t ) ∈ {(L ×T )|(l,m,t ) ∈P, ∀j ∈J} (3)

--- Page 4 ---

where l ⊆L and t ⊆T .
This function deﬁnes the tuples in terms of the location
and timestamp which are common to the set of dimensions or
properties.
Deﬁnition 4. A friendly function t⊘ on a set t ⊆ T is
deﬁned as:
t⊘ = (l,j ) ∈ {(L ×J)|(l,m,t ) ∈P, ∀t ∈T } (4)
where l ⊆L and j ⊆J.
This function captures the tuples which are common in the
time set in regards to the set of agro-location and dimension.
Thus equations 2-4 manages to combine the common tuples
in all possible ways.
A set is said to fulﬁl a closure property [25] if one operation
or a series of operations closes the data in the set. It’s not
uncommon for axioms to add closure properties as properties
of their own. Adding closure to a structure as an axiom is
totally pointless in modern set-theoretic deﬁnitions because
operations are usually deﬁned as maps between sets. However,
in practise, operations are often deﬁned ﬁrst on a superset
of the set in question, and a closure proof is needed to
establish that the functionality implemented to combinations
from that set only produces members of that set An even
integer collection is closed under addition, whereas an odd
integer collection is not.
Lemma 1. The familiarity functions are closed under the
same function.
The above Lemma states that:
l⊘⊘ =l (5)
j⊘⊘ =j (6)
t⊘⊘ =t (7)
Deﬁnition 5. A spatio-temporal structure is deﬁned as the
tuple (L,J,T,P ). Where ‘L’ is the set of agro-location. ‘J’
is the set of dimensions or properties collected from those
locations, ‘T’ is the set of temporal timestamps over the period
which the data is collected and ‘P’ is the mapping from the set
of agro-location to the collection of property with timestamp.
Deﬁnition 6. An agro-triple is deﬁned as (l,j,t ). Where
l ⊆L, j ⊆J and t ⊆T .
Due to the closure property seen in equations 5, 6 and 7 and
the friendly functions in equations 2, 3 and 4; an agro-triple
can also be deﬁned as (j⊘,j⊘⊘,t )
After the formal deﬁnitions, we are now at a state to
formally design some algorithms for the knowledge graph
creation.
V. K NOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION FOR SMART
AGRICULTURE
In order to form a knowledge representation in terms of a
lattice for smart agriculture, we start off with an agglomeration
algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Agglomeration of agri-location with dimension
and timestamp
Combine location, dimension and timestamp to form a triple
(l,j,t ) where l ⊆L, j ⊆J and t ⊆T .
Input: Set of agri-location: l ⊆ L; Set of dimensions: j ⊆ J
and Set of timestamps: t ⊆T
Output: Triples set (TS)
1: Create–Triples()
2: Initialize l0, j0 and t0 to φ.
3: for each timestamp ti ∈ T do
4: for each agri-location li ∈ L do
5: Compute li
⊘ and ji
⊘⊘
6: if li
⊘ == ji
⊘⊘
7: Li ←li
⊘⊘
8: Ji ←ji
⊘
9: Form tuple (Li,J i) for each ti
10: Remove duplicates if any.
11: end for
12: Compute t⊘
i and (Li,J i)⊘⊘
13: if ti⊘ == (Li,J i)⊘⊘
14: (L,J ) ← (Li,J i)⊘⊘
15: T ←ti⊘
16: Form triple (L,J,T )
17: Remove duplicates if any.
18: end for
Algorithm 1 deals with creating triples (L,J,T ) forming
a closed set due to the properties seen in Lemma 1. The
triples thus collected are kept in a set for further analysis and
representation. The lattice representation of the collection is
formulated using Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Lattice Structure
Lattice construction from the triples collected.
Input: Spatio-temporal Structure
Output: Spatio-temporal Lattice
1: procedure CONSTRUCT —AGRO-TRIPLE
2: for each dimension j ∈ J at time t ∈ T do
3: Find j⊘
t and j⊘⊘
t
4: Form agro-triple (j⊘
t ,j⊘⊘
t ,T t)
5: end for
6: end procedure
7: procedure CONSTRUCT —LATTICE STRUCTURE
8: for each agro-triple (TS) do
9: if ((j⊘
xt > j⊘
yt) && (j⊘⊘
xt < j⊘⊘
yt ) && (tx < ty))
10: Position (j⊘
xt, j⊘⊘
xt , tx) as the super triple of ( j⊘
yt,
j⊘⊘
yt , ty)
11: Construct an edge from ( j⊘
xt, j⊘⊘
xt , tx) which is
hierarchically above to (j⊘
yt, j⊘⊘
yt , ty).
12: end for
13: end procedure
Thus, algorithm 2 creates a meet lattice from the triples
created from algorithm 1. We now provide some deﬁnitions
relating to the same.

--- Page 5 ---

Deﬁnition 7. An agro-triple (l,j,t ) is a triple which is
created from a spatio-temporal structure (L,J,T,P ) and col-
lectively forms a lattice structure ‘ ∂(L,J,T )’.
Order theory and abstract algebra both study lattices as
abstract structures. Partly ordered set where each pair of
elements has a unique supremum (also known as a least upper
limit or join) and unique inﬁmum (also called a greatest lower
bound or meet).
Deﬁnition 8. An agro-triple (lx,j x,t x) is said to be a super
triple of (lx,j x,t x) iff ly ⊆ lx, jx ⊆ jy and tx ⊆ ty. This
set of agro-triples in such hierarchy ﬁnally forms the lattice
structure ‘∂(L,J,T )’.
Deﬁnition 9. The lattice structure ∂(L,J,T ) fulﬁlls the
partial ordered property of a lattice bearing a lattice suprema
deﬁned as:
∨t∈T < (l,j,t )>=< ∩t∈Tl⊘⊘, ∪t∈Tj, ∪t∈Tt> (8)
Deﬁnition 10. The lattice structure ∂(L,J,T ) fulﬁlls the
partial ordered property of a lattice bearing a lattice inﬁma
deﬁned as:
∧t∈T < (l,j,t )>=< ∪t∈Tl, ∩t∈Tj⊘⊘, ∩t∈Tt> (9)
Deﬁnition 11. The partial ordered property along with the
property that each and every agro-triple has both supremum
(join) and inﬁmum (meet), guarantees ∂(L,J,T ) to be a
complete lattice.
After the formal deﬁnitions of the lattice structure formed
from agro-triples, we now concentrate on the rules that could
be generated from the same.
Associative rule learning is a machine learning technique
based on rules for uncovering new relationships between
variables in huge datasets. Its goal is to ﬁnd interesting rules
in databases and identify the ones that are powerful. To
uncover common patterns, correlations, connections, or causal
structures in different types of databases such as relational
databases, transactional databases, and other types of data
repositories, a method known as association rule mining is
used. If we have a series of transactions, association rule
mining attempts to uncover those rules that let us know when
something will happen by looking at what else has happened
in the transaction.
Deﬁnition 12. The agro-triples generates associative rules
amongst the dimensions for a timestamp. Formally,
∀(l,j,t ) ∈∂(L,J,T ); ∃jx ∧jy;jx
t
− →jy (10)
Where, jx, jy ⊆j and jx ∪jy =j
If-then statements in association rules offer this kind of
information. Unlike logical if-then rules, association rules are
generated from data and are, as a result, probabilistic in
nature. There are two numbers in an association rule that
describe the degree of ambiguity about the rule in addition
to the antecedent (if) and the consequent (then). Association
analysis uses groups of items (called itemsets) that are distinct
as the antecedent and consequent (do not have any items in
common). The ﬁrst number is known as the rule’s support. The
basis for the rule’s support is the total number of transactions,
which includes all items in the preceding and following
portions. There are occasions when the support is reported
as a percentage of the database’s total records. The second
number is referred to as the rule’s level of conﬁdence. It is
the ratio of the number of transactions that contain all the
subsequent and antecedent (the support) items to the number
of transactions that include all the antecedent.
Deﬁnition 13. The supportφ of each rulejx
t
− →jy genereted
from the agro-triples (l, j, t) of a spatio-temporal lattice
structure ∂(L,J,T ) is deﬁned as:
φ(jx
t
− →jy) = |{jx ∪tjy}⊘|
|J| = |lt|
|J| (11)
Similarly, we deﬁne conﬁdence as;
Deﬁnition 14. The conﬁdence µ of each rule jx
t
− →jy
genereted from the agro-triples (l, j, t) of a spatio-temporal
lattice structure ∂(L,J,T ) is deﬁned as:
µ(jx
t
− →jy) = |{jx ∪tjy}⊘|
|j⊘x | = |lt|
|j⊘x | (12)
We now present a formal algorithm 3 to generate and store
the associative rules.
Algorithm 3 Agro-triple rule generation
Generate association rules from agro-triples from spatio-
temporal lattice structure
Input: Set of Agro-triples
Output: Set of associative rules
1: procedure GENERATE —ASSOCIATIVE -RULES
2: ∆ =φ
3: for each agro-triple (l, j, t) do
4: if ((jtarget ∈ j) && (ttarget ∈ t))
5: Generate rules ∆i : j
t
− →jtarget
6: ∆ = ∆ ⋃ ∆i
7: end for
8: Compute µ and φ for each rule in ∆
9: end procedure
The representation of agro-data as a data cube can be viewed
as shown in Table IV or as Table V. A few statements can be
observed.
TABLE IV
LOCATION -DIMENSION PROJECTION WITH TIMESTAMP
T1 . . . Tt
J1 J2 . . . Jk . . . J1 J2 . . . Jk
L1 c c c c c
L2 c c c c c c
. . . c c c c
Ln c c c c c c

--- Page 6 ---

TABLE V
TEMPORAL -L OCATION PROJECTION WITH DIMENSION
J1 . . . Jk
T1 T2 . . . Tt . . . T1 T2 . . . Tt
L1 c c c
L2 c c c c
. . . c c c c c
Ln c c c c c
Statement 1. Homogeneous agro-triples are generated from
both of the data cubes shown in Table IV and Table V with
the identical count.
Statement 2. Isomorphic spatio-temporal lattice structure is
generated from both of the projections.
Hence, regardless of the raw agro-data projection as a data
cube, we can ﬁrst generate the agro-triples and then create the
spatio-temporal lattice structure which will ﬁnally lead to a
set associative rules for reasoning. Thus we have constructed
a knowledge graph in terms of a lattice for knowledge repre-
sentation and reasoning.
VI. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We test our algorithms with the help of toy datasets created
for the purpose as shown in Table VI - IX. We have taken into
account ten agro-locations {L1,L 2,...,L 10}. Six dimensions
or properties are taken {J1,J 2,...,J 6} over a time span of
four timestamps {T1,T 2,...,T 4}.
TABLE VI
TOY DATA SET PROJECTION FROM AGRO -LOCATION TO DIMENSIONS (T1)
Agro-Location J1 J2 J3 J4 J5 J6
L1 c c c c
L2 c c c c c
L3 c c c
L4 c c c
L5 c c c c c
L6 c c c
L7 c c c c
L8 c c c
L9 c c c
L10 c c c
TABLE VII
TOY DATA SET PROJECTION FROM AGRO -LOCATION TO DIMENSIONS (T2)
Agro-Location J1 J2 J3 J4 J5 J6
L1 c c c c
L2 c c c c c
L3 c c c
L4 c c c
L5 c c c c c
L6 c c c c
L7 c c c c c
L8 c c c c c
L9 c c c c
L10 c c c c
TABLE VIII
TOY DATA SET PROJECTION FROM AGRO -LOCATION TO DIMENSIONS (T3)
Agro-Location J1 J2 J3 J4 J5 J6
L1 c c c c
L2 c c c c
L3 c c c
L4 c c c
L5 c c c c
L6 c c c
L7 c c c c
L8 c c c c
L9 c c c c c
L10 c c c
TABLE IX
TOY DATA SET PROJECTION FROM AGRO -LOCATION TO DIMENSIONS (T4)
Agro-Location J1 J2 J3 J4 J5 J6
L1 c c c c
L2 c c c
L3 c c c
L4 c c
L5 c c c c c
L6 c c c
L7 c c c
L8 c c c
L9 c c c c
L10 c c c c
Fig. 1. Spatio-Temporal Lattice Structure
We now implement Algorithm 1 over the data to collect the
agro-triples. It is observed that a total of seventy six agro-
triples were generated. Some of them are shown in Table X.
Now we are ready to implement Algorithm 2 for the statio-
temporal lattice creation.
The lattice structure so created with all the properties
mentioned in the previous section is shown in Fig. 1. Fi-
nally Algorithm 3 is implemented and a total of twenty six
associative rules were generated with a support of 0.7 and a
conﬁdence of 0.8.
The asymptotic time complexity analysis of the algorithms
are now discussed. Algorithm 1 bears a time complexity of
O(L ×J ×T ). Algorithm 2 has a complexity of O(L ×J ×

--- Page 7 ---

TABLE X
AGRO-TRIPLES GENERATED
Agro-Triple ID Agro-Location Dimension Timestamp
TS 1 L1 J2,J 3,J 4,J 5 T2,T 4
TS 2 L2 J1,J 2,J 3,J 5 T2,T 3
TS 3 L1,L 7 J2,J 4,J 5 T2T3
TS 4 L2,L 3 J3,J 5,J 6 T1
...
TS 76 L1,L 3,L 5,L 8,L 9 J2,J 4 T3
T × |S|), where |S| is the size of the spatio-temporal lattice
structure. Finally Algorithm 3 also take a time ofO(L×J ×T ).
VII. C ONCLUSION
With the integration of service-oriented architecture ser-
vices, precision farming has become a huge opportunity in
agriculture. It’s imperative that new approaches for processing
raw data and extracting valuable information be developed.
This is particularly true for the ﬁeld of agriculture. Regardless
of the fact that the data are constantly changing day by day,
meaningful data extraction is used by many disciplines, includ-
ing IoT-based enterprises, the automation sector, corporations,
and many more. With the use of ontologies, it is possible
to extract relevant information from a set of data by looking
at their relationships. Ontology may be used for a variety of
purposes, including decision support systems, expert systems,
and the reuse of domain knowledge.
In this paper, we have suggested the use of a lattice structure
for knowledge representation of the data collected from the
IoT devices. The lattice structure is created from spatio-
temporal data and ﬁnally rules were generated based on the
properties of the lattice for reasoning. In future, we tend to
collect real time data from sensors and implement the same
over the algorithms described.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is partially supported by the NSF Grant
2025682 at Tennessee Tech University, USA.
REFERENCES
[1] Ngo, Q. Hung, N. L. Khac, and T. Kechadi, “Ontology based ap-
proach for precision agriculture.” In International Conference on Multi-
disciplinary Trends in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 175-186. Springer,
Cham, 2018.
[2] Taylor, Marcus, “Climate-smart agriculture: what is it good for?.” The
Journal of Peasant Studies 45, no. 1 (2018): 89-107.
[3] Union, United. “World population projected to reach 9.8 billion in 2050,
and 11.2 billion in 2100.” UN DESA: New York, NY , USA (2017).
[4] Lobell, David B., Kenneth G. Cassman, and Christopher B. Field, “Crop
yield gaps: their importance, magnitudes, and causes.” Annual review
of environment and resources 34 (2009): 179-204.
[5] Zhou, X., H. B. Zheng, X. Q. Xu, J. Y . He, X. K. Ge, X. Yao, T.
Cheng, Y . Zhu, W. X. Cao, and Y . C. Tian, “Predicting grain yield in rice
using multi-temporal vegetation indices from UA V-based multispectral
and digital imagery.” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing 130 (2017): 246-255.
[6] Zhang, Lei, Ibibia K. Dabipi, and Willie L. Brown Jr. “Internet of Things
applications for agriculture.” Internet of things A to Z: technologies and
applications (2018): 507-528.
[7] Sinha, Bam Bahadur, and R. Dhanalakshmi. “Recent advancements and
challenges of Internet of Things in smart agriculture: A survey.” Future
Generation Computer Systems 126 (2022): 169-184.
[8] Waleed, Muhammad, Tai-Won Um, Tariq Kamal, and Syed Muhammad
Usman. “Classiﬁcation of Agriculture Farm Machinery Using Machine
Learning and Internet of Things.” Symmetry 13, no. 3 (2021): 403.
[9] Caracciolo, Caterina, Armando Stellato, Ahsan Morshed, Gudrun Jo-
hannsen, Sachit Rajbhandari, Yves Jaques, and Johannes Keizer. “The
AGROVOC linked dataset.” Semantic Web 4, no. 3 (2013): 341-348.
[10] Alreshidi, Eissa. “SAAONT: Ontological knowledge-based development
to support intelligent decision-making systems for Saudi Arabian agri-
culture.” (2019).
[11] Aydin, Sahin, and Mehmet Naﬁz Aydin. “Semantic and syntactic in-
teroperability for agricultural open-data platforms in the context of IoT
using crop-speciﬁc trait ontologies.” Applied Sciences 10, no. 13 (2020).
[12] Lacasta, Javier, F. Javier Lopez-Pellicer, Borja Espejo-Garc ´ıa, Javier
Nogueras-Iso, and F. Javier Zarazaga-Soria. “Agricultural recommen-
dation system for crop protection.” Computers and Electronics in Agri-
culture 152 (2018): 82-89.
[13] Bangkhomned, Winai, and Janjira Payakpate. “Applying Ontology
Knowledge Representation Technology and Semantic Searching Meth-
ods to Support the Production of High Quality Longan Fruit.” In
Information Science and Applications, pp. 601-612. Springer, 2020.
[14] Li, Daiyi, Li Kang, Xinrong Cheng, Daoliang Li, Laiqing Ji, Kaiyi
Wang, and Yingyi Chen. “An ontology-based knowledge representation
and implement method for crop cultivation standard.” Mathematical and
Computer Modelling 58, no. 3-4 (2013): 466-473.
[15] Naidoo, Nadia, Sahil Lawton, Micara Ramnanan, Jean Vincent Fonou-
Dombeu, and Rachan Gowda. “Modelling Climate Smart Agriculture
with Ontology.” In IEEE International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence, Big Data, Computing and Data Communication Systems, 2021.
[16] Shankhdhar, Gaurav Kant, Richa Sharma, and Manuj Darbari. “SAGRO-
Lite: A Light Weight Agent Based Semantic Model for the Internet of
Things for Smart Agriculture in Developing Countries.” In Semantic
IoT: Theory and Applications, pp. 265-302. Springer, Cham, 2021.
[17] Sanjeevi, P., B. Siva Kumar, S. Prasanna, J. Maruthupandi, R. Manikan-
dan, and A. Baseera. “An ontology enabled internet of things framework
in intelligent agriculture for preventing post-harvest losses.” Complex &
Intelligent Systems 7, no. 4 (2021): 1767-1783.
[18] Markman, Arthur B. “Knowledge representation.” Psychology Press,
2013.
[19] Van Harmelen, Frank, Vladimir Lifschitz, and Bruce Porter, eds. “Hand-
book of knowledge representation.” Elsevier, 2008.
[20] Brachman, Ronald J., and Hector J. Levesque. “Readings in knowledge
representation.” AT and T Bell Labs., 1985.
[21] Levesque, Hector J. “Knowledge representation and reasoning.” Annual
review of computer science 1, no. 1 (1986): 255-287.
[22] Hsiao, Cheng. “Analysis of panel data.” No. 54. Cambridge university
press, 2014.
[23] Baltagi, Badi Hani. “Econometric analysis of panel data.” V ol. 4.
Chichester: John wiley & sons, 2008.
[24] Chamberlain, Gary. “Feedback in panel data models.” Journal of Econo-
metrics (2021).
[25] Bhuyan, Bikram P., Arindam Karmakar, and Shyamanta M. Hazarika.
“Bounding Stability in Formal Concept Analysis.” In Advanced Com-
putational and Communication Paradigms, pp. 545-552. Springer, 2018.
[26] Gupta, Maanak, Mahmoud Abdelsalam, Sajad Khorsandroo, and Sudip
Mittal. “Security and privacy in smart farming: Challenges and oppor-
tunities.” IEEE Access 8 (2020): 34564-34584.
[27] Sontowski, Sina, Maanak Gupta, Sai Sree Laya Chukkapalli, Mahmoud
Abdelsalam, Sudip Mittal, Anupam Joshi, and Ravi Sandhu. “Cyber at-
tacks on smart farming infrastructure.” In IEEE International Conference
on Collaboration and Internet Computing (CIC), pp. 135-143, 2020.
[28] Chukkapalli, Sai Sree Laya and et al. “Ontologies and artiﬁcial intel-
ligence systems for the cooperative smart farming ecosystem.” IEEE
Access 8 (2020): 164045-164064.
[29] Chukkapalli, Sai Sree Laya and et al. “A smart-farming ontology for
attribute based access control.” In 2020 IEEE 6th Intl Conference on
Big Data Security on Cloud (BigDataSecurity), pp. 29-34. IEEE, 2020.
[30] Gupta, Maanak, Feras M. Awaysheh, James Benson, Mamoun Alazab,
Farhan Patwa, and Ravi Sandhu. “An Attribute-Based Access Control
for Cloud Enabled Industrial Smart Vehicles.” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics 17, no. 6 (2020): 4288-4297.
[31] Bhuyan, Bikram Pratim. “Relative similarity and stability in FCA pattern
structures using game theory.” In 2017 2nd International Conference on
Communication Systems, Computing and IT Applications (CSCITA),
pp. 207-212. IEEE, 2017.