--- Page 1 ---

International Journal of Technology, Management & Knowledge Processing 
 
12 
 
Smart Agriculture Architecture and Current 
State in India 
 Parul Verma 
Amity Institute of Information Technology, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow, India. pverma1@lko.amity.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract--The IoT (Internet of Things) is going hand in hand with 
every domain. The agriculture domain is also set to exploit the 
benefits of IoT. Smart agriculture, Precision farming are the 
buzzwords in the agriculture domain. It will help farmers in getting 
more and more benefits of their crops and can also help them in 
avoiding many issues related to weather and soil conditions which 
are harmful to their crops. Farmers can keep an eye on various 
factors like changing weather conditions, soil and fertilizers, pest 
control, cattle, etc. by using the precision farming concept. Use of 
smart sensors and analyzing data received from them will lead to the 
precision farming concept. Precision farming is the latest concept in 
the agriculture field whereby making using of wireless technologies 
one can do precise and controlled farming. Agriculture is an 
important pillar of the Indian economy hence integrating technology 
with agriculture will give rise to a new era and will strengthen the 
economy as well. This paper is outlined to discuss the role of IoT in 
the Agriculture
 domain, Smart Agriculture Framework, and the 
analytics that can be done on data accessed through smart devices. 
The paper will also outline current state of smart agriculture in 
India. 
 
Keywords: 
IoT, Agriculture Domain, Precision Farming, Smart Agriculture, 
Internet of Things 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The IoT (Internet of Things) is a set of interconnected 
devices which are basically mechanical or digital in nature. 
All such devices have their unique identification number. 
These IoT devices are capable enough to transfer information 
or data over the network and do not require any human 
intervention for the same. IoT is being used in versatile 
domains like smart homes, smart classes, health care, 
business, and agriculture. The traditional IoT architecture 
collects data from sensors, actuators, wearables, and others 
dispersed IoT devices. The collected data is being transmitted 
to the central repository, where it is processed collectively or 
transmitted further. 
IoT is changing the way each domain is working now a days. 
The agriculture industry also needs to draw benefits of IoT 
and should make remarkable success by overcoming various 
challenges of weather changes and other environmental 
factors. Incorporating IoT will lead to the smart farming 
concept and it will enable t h e agriculture industry to 
increas
e 
operational efficiency, lower costs, reduce waste, and 
improve the quality of their yield. 
 
In today’s scenario, with the increasing population, more 
food is required, and to fulfill the demand the agriculture 
industry and farmers need to work in smartly. Despite the 
various weather conditions, rising temperature, and weather 
fluctuations, farmers need to adapt the latest technology to 
face these challenges. Using this technology productivity of 
the farmers may be improved. 
 
The smart farming concept is ready to change the entire 
concept of traditional farming. The smart farming system 
works in a way where every activity related to crops and fields 
can be monitored. The sensors can record light, humidity, 
temperature, soil moisture, etc., and help farmers to monitor 
their crops from anywhere and take appropriate steps to 
improve their crop performance. IoT is not going to help 
farmers to improve traditional farming ways only. The new 
concepts also originate with the usage of these sensors and 
actuators like organic farming, family farming preservation of 
high-quality varieties etc. Smart farming provides great 
benefits like water usage in an efficient manner or optimization 
of various inputs. 
 
IoT is being used in agriculture in many ways, and it 
conver
ts normal farming to smart farming. There are many 
different techniques or technology by which IoT comes into 
the picture and plays a vital role in the Agriculture domain. It 
makes farming more precise and hence known as Precision 
Farming. 
 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
Various researchers have worked in this area and proposed 
algorithms and approaches to meet smart farming demands 
Liu et al. [1] suggested approach which is based on precision 
irrigation. Ersin et al [2] proposed an irrigation system that 
makes use of a microcontroller. They justified their proposed 
system is quite efficient as compared to other conventional 
methods. Agarwal et. al.[3] proposed smart irrigation system. 
They utilized Raspberry pi and Arduino for developing such 
kind of smart system. Koprda et al.[4] also proposed a similar 
kind of smart irrigation system based on the microcontroller 
concept. Ahouandjinou et al. [5] 
VOLUME 1, ISSUE 1, AUG 2021

--- Page 2 ---

International Journal of Technology, Management & Knowledge Processing 
 
13 
 
demonstrated the usage of farm pest detection by making use 
of ultrasonic sensors. Goap et al. [6] proposed IoT based 
agriculture system, whereas Smith et al. [7] used Machine 
Learning approaches for soil classification. Kwok et al. [8] 
suggested plant detection using deep learning and then, based 
on plant type, its appropriate irrigation amount required. 
Deep learning and altitude-based economic irrigation 
approach has been discussed in the research by Wang, 
Muzzammel, Raheel et al. [9]. The study of current literature 
and work of various researchers emphasized the active role of 
IoT and Machine Learning techniques in Smart Farming. 
 
 
III. MAJOR APPLICATIONS OF IoT IN 
AGRICULTURE 
 
IoT can be well exploited by using of upcoming techniques 
like Machine Learning, Deep Learning, Data Analytics to 
improve the performance of the Agriculture domain and give 
better results to the farmer. The latest wireless IoT sensors can 
be integrated with the agriculture setup in the current scenario 
to increase agriculture performance. 
 
A. Precision Farming 
It is one of the most popular applications of IoT in 
agriculture. Precision farming , as in literal terms, refers to 
accurate and controlled farming. It uses sensors, control 
systems, robotics, and autonomous vehicles to perform a 
variety of activities. By using high-speed internet, mobile 
devices and satellites that are low in cost can lead to precision 
farming concept. 
 
B. Livestock Monitoring 
The farmers who have large farm setups may use IoT 
setup to track the data regarding the location and health of 
their cattle. The information collected through the sensors 
help them to visualize and identify the animals who are not 
well. They can further keep sick animals separate from the 
healthier one and thus stop spreading the disease. 
 
C. Field Observation 
By making use of IoT sensors, farmers can keep track of 
updated information about their fields. Complete information 
about their fields can be stored at one central location and 
easily accessed by farmers to make quick decisions 
accordingly. 
 
D. Climate Conditions 
Agriculture is mainly dependent upon climatic conditions. 
Smart sensors can be implemented to mount weather stations 
to get updated and the latest information regarding the 
weather. These sensors are placed across the field and collect 
data from a field which is further transmitted to the 
cloud. The further analysis of such data will help in taking 
decisions for specific type of crops and to decisions to 
improve the quality and quantity of crops. Few such IoT 
devices are-all METEO, Smart elements and Pycno. 
E. Smart Greenhouses 
Smart greenhouses can be implemented with the help of 
IoT sensors. These smart greenhouses are capable in 
managing climatic conditions without human intervention. 
Environmental conditions in a smart greenhouse can be 
managed very easily from the remote location as well. These 
sensors eliminate the need of manual monitoring. Cloud 
servers can be used for processing of data and to also apply 
control action. Such effective designs give good solutions to 
famers without having manual intervention. There are 
companies which are providing solar powered IoT sensors 
that can be used to monitor water consumption by messages 
to farmer through SMS alerts. 
IV. SMART AGRICULTURE AND DATA 
ANALYTICS 
 
A. Precision Farming 
Soil features analysis is the most important aspect of 
agriculture. Soil features analysis gives direction to farmers to 
take different decisions regarding their crops. Soil nutrient 
level decides the fate of the crops. Features like a type of soil, 
application of fertilizer, cropping history, level of irrigation, 
topography, etc., give deep insight about the various factors 
related to soil. In the current situation many manufacturers are 
providing smart sensors that farmers can use to keep a track of 
various soil features and take further decisions based on its 
status. Agrocare is one of the solutions for farmers. They can 
analyze multiple soil samples and make further decisions 
[10]. Drought is a crucial factor that effects agriculture 
greatly. To deal with this issue, Authors [11] used SMOS L2 
to calculate the Soil Water Deficit Index (SWDI) in Spain. In 
[12], used MODIS (Moderate Resolution Imaging 
Spectroradiometer) to record various soil properties to 
estimate the risk of land degradation. [13] used sensor that is 
vision-based robot known as Agribot for sowing seeds. 
 
B. Irrigation Data 
The current scenario of the water crisis puts an utmost 
demand for its proper utilization in the agriculture field. The 
required amount of water should be provided to the crops at 
the required time. Estimation of accurate water demand of a 
crop is a difficult task as many other factors are also associated 
with it. A precise wireless system that can provide accurate 
water demand will lead to a better crop health. A significant 
increase in crop efficiency is expected with the use of IoT-
based techniques. One example for such a case is irrigation 
management by assessing crop water stress index [14]. To 
calculate CWSI, one needs to record the crop canopy of 
different time zones and temperatures. Intelligent farm 
monitoring systems use field sensors connected to central 
sever meant for processing and analysing data collected from 
farm sensors. A prominent example is VRI (Variable Rate 
Irrigation) optimization by CropMetrics [15], 
VOLUME 1, ISSUE 1, AUG 2021

--- Page 3 ---

International Journal of Technology, Management & Knowledge Processing 
 
14 
 
that performs based on variability of soil and helps in 
efficiency of water usage. 
 
C. Fertilizer 
A balanced quantity of nutrients is required for healthy 
crops. Improper quantity of nutrients will spoil the quality of 
crops and soil also many times. In smart agriculture, the exact 
amount of nutrient requirements can be traced, reducing the 
risk of negative effects on soil and crop. Latest IoT sensors 
based approaches help in estimating the nutrient requirements 
of the crops with better accuracy.[16,17] One example for 
that is NDVI (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) , 
which uses of satellite images to monitor nutrient 
requirements of crops[18,19]. Besides these other benefits of 
IoT are fertigation [20] and chemigation; these techniques 
used fertilizers, pesticides, etc., through irrigation system 
only. 
 
D. Forecasting of Crop Yield 
Monitoring the crop yield is the most crucial aspect of 
Smart Agriculture/ Precision farming. Analysis of crop yield, 
quality of grains and moisture content directs the farmers to 
make appropriate decisions. Yield monitoring helps farmers 
in better planning about their crops. The yield quality depends 
on various parameters. One of them is the quality of pollens 
that play an important role in predicting of seed yields under 
changing environment. [21-23]. Analysis of quality of and 
maturity of yield helps farmers determine the correct time of 
harvesting as well. FarmRTX App can be linked to a yield 
monitor developed by [24] that can be installed for yield 
monitoring. It provides the live status of harvest. 
 
V. SMART AGRICULTURE 
ARCHITECTURE 
 
 
Smart agriculture architecture may have the following layers- 
 Innermost layer (Sensor Layer) 
 Middle layer (Network Layer and Service Layer) 
 Topmost layer (Application Layer) 
 
Sensor Layer is the most important layer of IoT-based smart 
farming architecture. There are various sensors that can be 
placed in smart farming architecture and can trap variety of 
data. These sensors are meant to keep track of moisture, soil 
chemical properties, ph level, and many more important data. 
In smart farming architecture variety of sensors are placed to 
measure different crop attributes. 
 
Optical sensors- are used to record various properties of soil. 
These sensors used light reflection information to capture 
information that data is further analyzed with 
photogrammetry techniques. The information may be related 
to moisture, color of soil, vegetation, temperature, height, size, 
and position of plants. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Smart Agriculture Architecture 
 
Electrochemical sensors are used to collect data regarding soil 
nutrients and their pH level. Location sensors can be used to 
access spatial information using GPS satellites. Weather 
stations are different units which are placed at a different 
location in the farming area. These stations trap data related 
to airflow, wind speed, humidity level, solar radiation, 
direction of a wind, etc. 
 
Network Layer- WSN (Wireless Sensor Network) 
communication protocols are used at this layer. WSNs 
facilitate monitoring of crop quality as well as surveillance of 
crops. WSN helps in regular monitoring of various 
environmental factors and helps the farmer in achieving 
maximum productivity. The sensors at this layer used 
different topologies depending upon application like 
precision farming, field irrigation management, or crop 
management. For smart agriculture, there is no specific 
communication technology and routing protocol. There is a 
vast variation in usage of various communication 
technologies. There are a variety of protocols that work in 
precision agriculture. Few of them are like- ZigBee, LoRa, 
6LoWPAN, RFID etc. 
 
Service Layer makes an important component of smart 
agriculture architecture. The processes at the service layer 
enable the advanced cultivation procedure, and it also helps 
boos
t productivity. Information Management is deployed at 
the service layer. The farmers can make use of the data stored 
at service layer. Farmer can collect data from various WSN 
nodes and can analyze them as well by using historical data 
as well. Mahout and other IoT platforms help in performing 
Big Data Analytics in the agriculture domain. The data mining 
process is 
VOLUME 1, ISSUE 1, AUG 2021

--- Page 4 ---

International Journal of Technology, Management & Knowledge Processing 
 
15 
 
based on Hadoop or Apache Spark, which can find hidden 
patterns in the collected data. 
 
Application Layer provides the visualization results after the 
review and data analytics performed by the service layer. The 
application layer is responsible for presenting the results in a 
user-understandable way, and it will help in field optimization, 
pesticide drift control, to name a few. There are a variety of 
applications that are used in smart agriculture framework at 
application layer like- Variable Rate Fertilizer, Variable 
Spraying application, Weed Mapping Application, and other 
IoT based applications help farmers in decision making. 
 
VI. CHALLENGES FOR SMART FARMING 
Smart farming is a new vibe that utilizes the latest 
technology trends like AI, IoT, Machine learning to improve 
the agriculture performance. The important aspect of smart 
farming is implementing various sensors and other devices 
used to collect relevant data required for analysis purposes. 
Technology is changing very fast; hence to cater to the latest 
updations in the architecture is a difficult task. Desides that, 
network bandwidth is also one of the issues in the 
implementation of smart farming. There are various other 
challenges or issues that smart farming faces- 
Standards interoperability 
Interoperability is the major concern while implementation of 
Smart Farming architecture. Technology is growing leap and 
bounds. Every day, some new IoT tools and platforms are 
hitting the market. These tools and platforms do not follow 
the same standards, resulting in interoperability issues that 
lead to lack of uniform data analysis and visualization. 
 
Lack of sufficient knowledge 
At the center of smart farming we have farmers who are not 
very comfortable with these technological aspects. Training 
farmers for the basic concepts and utilization of 
various smart 
devices is of utmost importance. Lack of knowledge will lead to 
disastrous results. 
 
Internet Connectivity 
A major hurdle in the implementation of smart farming 
architecture is the poor internet connectivity in rural areas. 
Poor network bandwidth issues also make the implementation 
of smart farming architecture quite tricky. 
 
Scalability 
Farmers have a varied size of farms; hence they need IoT 
devices that should be scalable , which means that the same 
technology should apply to all sizes of farms. These devices 
are, in general, configured manually; hence it is also a concern 
area. The devices and tools used for smart farming should be 
self-configurable to draw maximum benefits. 
Energy Consumption 
It is another critical challenge in the case of smart farming. To 
implement smart farming architecture, many data centers, 
gateways, and hubs are required to make sensors operable and 
lead to heavy energy consumption. It needs more energy 
sources to restock that energy. 
 
Technology failure 
Too much dependency on technology will lead to some 
serious risks for the crops too. Failure of technology at any 
point in time will lead to crop damages and can affect farmers. 
For example, failure of smart sensors can lead to overwatering 
or under watering of crops and can have serious impact on 
crops. 
 
Security Concerns 
Security is a significant concern and challenge as well in 
smart farming. Data theft, As the count of middleware 
technology, endpoints, and IoT devices in active use in 
agriculture is increasing, the number of entry-points for 
malicious third- party programs is going up as well. Since the 
third-party attacks on a complex IoT system are often 
decentralized, detecting, and removing them emerges as a big 
challenge. 
 
VII. CURRENT STATE OF 
SMART AGRICULTURE IN 
INDIA 
Precision farming is a base of Smart Agriculture. 
Precision farming is dependent upon GPS (Global Positioning 
System) technology which makes use of sensors. Precision 
agriculture provides accurate information about the 
requirements of water, fertilizers, pesticides, etc. The grain 
requirement of India is going to reach 480 million tons by the 
year 2050. To attain such requirement, there is an utmost need 
to adapt the concept of Precision farming. Applying various 
precision farming technologies in a balanced way will lead to 
promising results in India as well. Precision farming can be 
categorized into soft and hard. Soft precision farming 
involves human intervention for management and decision- 
making. However, hard precision farming is all dependent 
upon GPS, RS (Remote Sensing), VRT (Variable Rate 
Technology), etc. 
 
Being the second largest producer of sugarcane, India 
should adapt precision farming concept for it and harvest the 
benefits of it. Besides that, in other fruit and vegetable 
farming has already started adapting these automated systems 
for better production results. 
 
A. Precision Farming Adoption in India 
 
India should start adapting the precision farming concept 
for small farms where sensors and small robots will 
contribute. These may run on various renewable fuels like 
VOLUME 1, ISSUE 1, AUG 2021

--- Page 5 ---

International Journal of Technology, Management & Knowledge Processing 
 
16 
 
biofuels and also on electricity that may be produced by 
agriculture residues. The US and Europe had already 
adapted small robots to get precise irrigation water 
requirement, weed removal and harvesting. India should 
also look forward in 
this direction and should adopt such 
techniques. Japan and the US utilized drones for disease 
identification in farms. India is the ideal country where 
small farms can introduce these concepts of precision 
farming. 
 
Though there are high precision farming profits , but 
still it is in a nascent stage in India. Many companies like 
TKK (Tata Kisan Kendra), Trimble and Fasal that are 
working on this concept and will soon be introduced to 
the farmers in India. The TCL (Tata Chemicals Limited) 
is already working in this direction and trying to convert 
the whole 
farming business by using of advanc ed 
techniques. TCL is already propagating its services through 
TKK to use and understand remote-sensing techniques for 
assessing of soil condition, health of crop, prediction of 
crop yield and pest invasions. 
 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
 
IoT is having promising role in agriculture domain. 
Various researchers had justified its importance in 
agriculture domain. Agriculture plays an important role in 
economy of various countries. Performance improvement 
in farming by making use of IoT is setting a new 
benchmark. Latest discoveries of sensors and upgraded 
protocols are now set to support agriculture domain. 
Agriculture industry should exploit the benefits of these 
latest technologies and should improve the performance 
level. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y. Liu, Z.H. Ren, D.M. Li, X.K. Tian, Z.N. Lu, The research of precision 
irrigation decision support system based on genetic algorithm, in: Proc. 2006 
Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Cybern., 2006: pp. 3123 –3127. 
doi:10.1109/ICMLC.2006.258403. 
 
[2] Ç. Ersin, R. Gürbüz, A.K. Yakut, Application of an automatic plant 
irrigation system based arduino microcontroller using solar energy, in: Solid 
State Phenom., 2016: pp. 237–241. 
doi:10.4028/www.scientific.net/SSP.251.237. 
 
[3] N. Agrawal, S. Singhal, Smart drip irrigation system using raspberry pi 
and arduino, in: Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Autom. ICCCA 2015, 2015: 
pp. 928– 932. doi:10.1109/CCAA.2015.7148526. 
 
[4] S. Koprda, Z. Balogh, D. Hrubý, M. Turčáni, Proposal of the 
irrigation system using low-cost Arduino system as part of a smart home, 
in: SISY 2015 
- IEEE 13th Int. Symp. Intell. Syst. Informatics, Proc., 2015: pp. 229 –
233. doi:10.1109/SISY.2015.7325385. 
 
[5] A.S.R.M. Ahouandjinou, P.M.A.F. Kiki, K. Assogba, Smart 
environment monitoring system by using sensors ultrasonic detection of 
farm pests, in: BioSMART 2017 - Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Bio-Engineering 
Smart Technol., 2017. doi:10.1109/BIOSMART.2017.8095319. 
 
[6] A. Goap, D. Sharma, A.K. Shukla, C.R. Krishna, An IoT based smart 
irrigation management system using Machine learning and open source 
technologies, Elsevier, 2019 doi:10.1007/978-3-030-26763-6 
 
[7] D. Smith, W. Peng, Machine learning approaches for soil classification 
in a multi-agent deficit irrigation control system, in: Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. 
Ind. Technol., 2009. doi:10.1109/ICIT.2009.4939641. 
 
[8] J. Kwok, Y. Sun, A smart IoT-based irrigation system with 
automated plant recognition using deep learning, ACM Int. Conf. 
Proceeding Ser. (2018) 87–91. doi:10.1145/3177457.3177506. 
 
[9] R. Muzzammel, Intelligent Technologies and Applications, 
Springer Singapore, 2019. doi:10.1007/978-981-13-6052-7. 
 
[10] Accessed: Apr. 15, 2019.
 [Online]. https:// www.agrocares.com/en/products/lab-in-
the-box/ 
 
[11] Martínez F, J.; González- Z, A.; Sánchez, N.; Gumuzzio, A.; 
Herrero-J, C.M. "Satellite soil moisture for agricultural drought 
monitoring: Assessment of the SMOS derived Soil Water Deficit 
Index". Remote Sensing of Environment, Vol 177, May 2016, 
 
[12] Vågen et al., T.-G. Vågen, L.A. Winowiecki, J.E. Tondoh, L.T. 
Desta, 
T. Gumbricht, "Mapping of soil properties and land 
degradation risk in Africa using MODIS reflectance" Geoderma, vol 
263, 2016, pp. 216-225 
 
[13] P. V. Santhi, N. Kapileswar, V. K. R. Chenchela and C. H. V. S. 
Prasad, "Sensor and vision based autonomous AGRIBOT for 
sowing seeds," International Conf. on Energy, Communication, 
Data Analytics and Soft Computing, Chennai, 2017, 
 
[14] USDA. http://www.usda.gov (accessed December 22, 2018). 
 
[15] Jacob LaRue, Cole Fredrick, "Decision process for the 
application of variable rate irrigation", American Society of 
Agricultural and 
 Biological Engineers, Dallas, Texas, July 29 - August 1, 2012 
 
[16] https://
www.iof2020.eu/latest/news/2017/09/why-the 
internet-of- things-is-reinventing-plant-fertilization. 
 
[17] Lavanya G, Rani C, Ganeshkumar P, "An automated low cost IoT 
based Fertilizer Intimation System for smart agriculture", Sustainable 
Computing: Informatics and Systems, 2019. 
 
[18] Benincasa, P., Antognelli, S., Brunetti, L., Fabbri, C., Natale, A., 
Sartoretti, V, Vizzari, M. "Reliability of NDVI Derived by High 
Resolution Satellite and UAV Compared to In-Field Methods for the 
Evaluation of Early Crop N Status and Grain Yield in Wheat", 
Experimental Agriculture, 54(4), 2018, 604-622. 
 
[19] Hongli Liu; Xi Wang; Jin Bing-kun, "Study on Ndvi 
Optimization of Corn Variable Fertilizer Applicator", Agricultural 
Engineering, 
Sep-Dec 2018, Vol. 56 Issue 3, p193-202. 10
 
 
[20] G. Villarrubia, J. F. De Paz, D. H. De La Iglesia, J. Bajo, 
"Combining Multi-Agent Systems and Wireless Sensor Networks 
for Monitoring Crop Irrigation" Sensors, Aug 2017, 17(8): 1775 
 
[21] A. Wietzke, C. Westphal, P. Gras, M. Kraft, K. Pfohl, P. 
Karlovsky, E. Pawelzik, T. Tscharntke, I. Smit, "Insect pollination 
as a key factor for strawberry physiology and marketable fruit 
quality", Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, Vol 258, 2018. 
 
[22] Chung SO, Choi MC, Lee KH, Kim YJ, Hong SJ, Li M. 
VOLUME 1, ISSUE 1, AUG 2021

--- Page 6 ---

International Journal of Technology, Management & Knowledge Processing 
 
17 
 
Sensing technologies for grain crop yield monitoring systems: A review. 
Journal of Biosystem Engineering, 2016, 41:408-417 
 
[23] Majid Amini Dehaghi, "Effects of Biological and Chemical 
Fertilizers Nitrogen on Yield Quality and Quantity in Cumin", 
Journal of Chemical Health Risks, 4(2), 2014, 55 64. 
 
[24] https://www.farmtrx.com/ 
 
VOLUME 1, ISSUE 1, AUG 2021